Diagrammatic  Monte  Carlo


Kris Van Houcke1, 2, Evgeny Kozik1, 3, N. Prokof’ev1, 3, 4, and B. Svistunov1, 4

1  Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
2  Universiteit Gent, Vakgroep Subatomaire en Stralingsfysica,
  Proeftuinstraat 86, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
3  Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, ETH Z¨urich, CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland
4  Russian Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”, 123182 Moscow, Russia


Abstract.  Diagrammatic  Monte Carlo (DiagMC)  is a numeric technique that al-
lows  one  to  calculate  quantities  speciﬁed  in  terms  of  diagrammatic  expansions,
the latter being a standard tool  of many-body quantum statistics.  The sign  prob-
lem  that  is  typically  fatal  to  Monte  Carlo  approaches,  appears  to  be  manageable
with  DiagMC.  Starting  with  a  general  introduction  to  the  principles  of  DiagMC,
we  present  a  detailed  description  of  the  DiagMC  scheme  for  interacting  fermions
(Hubbard model), as well as the ﬁrst illustrative results for the equations of state.

1    Introduction. General  Principles

Diagrammatic  expansion  (Feynman  diagrams)  is  a  powerful  generic  tool  of
quantum  statistics  [1].  Mathematically,  diagrammatic  expansion—for    some
relevant quantity, Q, usually a Green’s function—is a series of integrals with
an ever increasing number of integration variables,

                 ∞∑   ∑   ∫
     Q(y)  =                  D(ξm, y, x   1, . . . , x        m) dx1 · · · dxm .                               (1)
                m=0   ξm
Here y is a set of parameters which the quantity Q can depend on, ξm indexes
diﬀerent terms of the same order m (the term m = 0 is understood as a func-
tion of y  only), and the  x’s  are the integration variables. Structures  similar
to Eq. (1) originate from perturbative expansions of the quantum-statistical
averages, in which case the functions  D  can be  represented by Feynman di-
agrams/graphs,  with  the  graph  lines  standing  for  either  Green’s  functions
(propagators) G  or interaction potentials  U, so that the whole  diagram en-
codes a certain product of G’s and U’s. It will be essential for our purposes
to approach the integrations in Eq. (1) in the same way as the diagram order
m  and  its  topology  when  deﬁning  the  notion  of  a  diagram,  in  contrast  to
analytic treatments where integrations are included into the deﬁnition of D.
    Diagrammatic Monte Carlo (DiagMC) [2] is a technique that allows one
to simulate quantities speciﬁed in terms of a diagrammatic series. In a broad
sense, it is a set of simple generic prescriptions for organizing a systematic-
error-free Metropolis-Rosenbluth-Teller type process that samples the series
2             Kris Van Houcke et al.

(1)  without  explicitly  performing  integrations  over the  internal  variables  in
each particular term. The rules are as follows.
    The  function  Q(y)  is  interpreted as  a  distribution  function  for  the  vari-
able(s) y. The statistical interpretation of Eq. (1) suggests calculating Q(y)
by a Markov-chain process which samples diagrams stochastically. The value
of  D  plays  the  role  of  the  statistical  weight  of  the  diagram  (i.e.,  the  prob-
ability  with  which  the  diagram  is  generated).  More  precisely,  to  deal  with
sign-alternating  series, one  writes  D  as  a  product  of  its  absolute  value  |D|,
which  determines  the  statistical  weight  of  the  diagram,  and  the  sign  func-
tion sD  = ±1, which contributes  to  the  statistics  for  Q  each time  the  term
D  is  generated. Since  contributions  of  diﬀerent  m-th  order  diagrams are  of
the same order of magnitude and their number grows factorially with m, the
combined m-th order contribution to Q is the result of nearly complete can-
cellation of the diagrams of diﬀerent sign. This is the notorious sign problem
(see, e.g., [3]). In our case, it causes an exponential scaling of the computation
time with the maximum diagram order, making it impossible to obtain sen-
sible results at large m. At this point one faces the problem of extrapolating
the answer to the m → ∞ limit. To make matters worse, the series may be
asymptotic/divergent. For this reason, the use of resummation techniques  [4]
is a crucial ingredient of DiagMC (see Secs. 4, 5).
    Though DiagMC has to  confront the sign problem, just like other exact
techniques  (e.g.,  the  dynamical  cluster  algorithms [5]),  it  has  an  important
advantage: it works immediately in the thermodynamic limit, and is not sub-
ject to the exponential scaling of the computational complexity with the sys-
tem or cluster volume. DiagMC also has a potential for vast improvements in
eﬃciency by using standard tricks of the analytic diagrammatic appr oach, de-
veloped to reduce the number of diagrams calculated explicitly term-by-term
by self-consistently taking into account chains of repeating parts as, e.g., in
the Dyson equation [1]. These ideas are the essence of the Bold Monte Carlo
scheme introduced in Ref. [6] and successfully applied to the Fermi-polaron
problem in Ref. [4]. In Sec. 4, we describe the basic steps in this direction for
DiagMC, such as the use of bold propagators.
    The stochastic sampling of Q(y) consists of a number of elementary sub-
processes (or updates) falling into two qualitatively diﬀerent classes: (I) up-
dates which do not change the number of continuous variables (they change
the values of variables in D, but not the form of the function itself), and (II)
updates which change the structure of D. The processes of class I are rather
straightforward,  being  identical  to  those  of  simulating  a  given  continuous
distribution |D(ξm, y, x   1, . . . , x        m)| of the variables x1, . . . , x        m.
    The crucial part is played by type-II updates, arranged to form comple-
mentary pairs with the detailed balance condition [7] satisﬁed in each pair. Let
A transform the diagram D(ξm, y, x   1, . . . , x        m) into D(ξm+n, y, x   1, . . . , x        m+n),
and, correspondingly, its counterpart B performs the inverse transformation.
For the new variables we introduce a vector notation: x = {xm+1, . . . , x        m+n}.
                                                        Diagrammatic Monte Carlo             3

The ﬁrst step in A consists of selecting some type of diagram transformation
and  proposing  x  which  is  generated from  a  certain probability  distribution
W (x). The form of W (x) is arbitrary, but to render the algorithm most ef-
ﬁcient, it is desirable that  W (x) is (i) of a simple analytic form with known
normalization, and (ii) close to the actual statistics of x in the ﬁnal diagram.
The second step consists of accepting the proposal with probability, Padd(x).
In B  one simply accepts the proposal for removing the variables x with the
probability Prem(x). The pair of complementary sub-processes is balanced if
the following equality is fulﬁlled [2]:
     Padd(x)  =  min{R(x)/W   (x),  1} ,                                                                (2)

     Prem(x)  =  min{W (x)/R  (x),  1} ,                                                                (3)

where
     R(x)  =  (pB/p   A) |D(ξm+n, y, x   1, . . . , x        m,  x)/  D(ξm, y, x   1, . . . , x        m)| ,       (4)
with pA and pB being the probabilities of addressing the sub-processes A and
B. [Often, pA ⁄= pB  is a natural choice.] The above protocol is a straightfor-
ward generalization of the standard approach [7,8] to  the sampling of func-
tions with a variable  number of continuous arguments.
    Generally speaking, the set of DiagMC updates is speciﬁc for a given type
of the diagrammatic expansion, being sensitive to both the topology and the
representation (say, momentum or coordinate) of the diagrams. The updating
strategy can be rendered more/less sophisticated, depending on what is being
optimized:  the  simplicity  or  the  eﬃciency.  Examples  of  particular  DiagM C
schemes can be found in Refs. [2,4,9–11].
    In  this  work,  we  consider  an  interacting  many-body  Fermi  system  and
work  with  diagrams  in  the  imaginary-time–momentum  representation.  We
employ a sophisticated (at ﬁrst glance) updating scheme based on the worm
algorithm idea [12] when updating ﬂexibility and eﬃciency are achieved b y ex-
tending the conﬁgurational space (in our case, the space of allowed diagrams).
As  far as we know, the algorithm being  presented is  the ﬁrst application of
the DiagMC method to connected many-body Feynman diagrams.
    Perturbative expansions in the interaction are often divergent. Dyson gave
a simple physical argument leading to a suﬃcient   condition for an expansion
series  to  diverge:  if  changing  the  sign  (or  phase)  of  some  parameter  γ  im-
plies  an  abrupt  change  of  the  physical  state  (e.g.,  the  change  of  symmetry,
or an instability), then γ  = 0 is the point of non-analyticity and the expan-
sion  in  powers  of  γ  is  a  priori  divergent [13].  In  particular, this  means  the
diagrammatic expansion with respect to the interaction in continuous space
is  divergent  for  both  bosons  and  fermions,  since  both  systems  collapse  at
negative (on average) interaction. Obviously, the opposite is not necessarily
true—that is the absence of singularity in the aforementioned sens  e does not
guarantee analyticity (and thus convergence at small enough γ)—but a dif-
ferent reason for a series to be non-analytic (and thus divergent at arbitrarily
4             Kris Van Houcke et al.

small  γ)  should  be  rather  exotic.  Therefore,  we  shall  rely  on  the  physical
picture to predict the analytic properties of the series at γ → 0.
    However,  the  real  power  of  the  analytic  diagrammatic  technique  lies  in
the possibility of reducing inﬁnite sums of diagrams (no matter convergent or
divergent) to simple integral equations, e.g., the Dyson equation. In addition
to that, for divergent asymptotic series one can employ generalized resumma-
tion  schemes  to  obtain  the  answer outside  of  the  series  convergence radius.
Finally,  when  the  resummation trick  fails,  the  series  can  be  analyzed using
approximate (biased) methods, which assume a certain function behind the
series. An example of the successful application of the resummation method
to a divergent sign alternating series for polarons can be found in Ref. [4]. In
this work we demonstrate that the DiagMC method is a viable approach to
study  interacting many-body systems. Even moderate success in this  direc-
tion is extremely important since other Monte Carlo approaches face a severe
sign problem before the fully controlled extrapolation to the thermodynamic
limit can be done.

2    Model  and  Diagrams

In what follows we discuss the Fermi-Hubbard model,

     H  =  ∑     (εk − µ σ ) a†σ kaσ k  +  U ∑      n↑r n↓r .                                             (5)
             k,σ                                 r

Here a†σ k  is the fermion creation operator with the quasi-momentum k lying
in the ﬁrst Brillouin zone, nσ r = a†σ raσ r, σ  =↑ ,  ↓ is the spin projection, and r
is the integer radius vector on the d-dimensional lattice. The lattice dispersion
is given by  εk  = −2t ∑   dα =1 cos(kα a), with a  and t being the lattice spacing
and the hopping amplitude, respectively; µ σ  is the chemical potential for the
component σ, and U  is the on-site interaction strength. Units are chosen such
that a and t are equal to unity.

 p   −1q        q         1p
 p  +q                           Fig. 1.  The  diagram  structural  element.  The  dashed
  2                       2p     vertical  line  represents  the  interaction  potential.  The
                                 upper (lower) solid lines represent spin-up (spin-down)
              τ                  fermionic propagators.


    We utilize the standard Matsubara diagrammatic technique [1]. The dia-
grams consist of (vertical) dashed lines standing for the pair interaction po-
tential U  and solid lines representing particle propagators G(0)  (see Fig. 1).
We adopt a convention that the imaginary-time axis is horizontal, and is di-
rected  from  right  to  left.  Since  in  our  case  there  are  no  interactions  within
                                                         Diagrammatic Monte Carlo             5

one and the same component, we require that the upper (lower) end of each
dashed  line  corresponds  to  the  spin-up  (spin-down)  component.  With  this
rule, the spin-up lines are distinguished from spin-down ones without explicit
labeling.
    A  free  fermionic  propagator  G(0)σ   (k, τ   =  τ2 − τ1)  associated  with  each
particle line running from τ1  to τ2  is deﬁned by
                       {
     G(0)                 −e−(εk−µ σ )τ (1 − n(0)σ k) ,     if τ  > 0 ,
       σ   (k, τ )  =     +e−(εk−µ σ )τ n(0)
                                            σ k ,               if τ  < 0 ,                                    (6)

with  n(0)σ k  =  [  1 + eβ (εk−µ σ )]  −1  being  the  occupation  of  the  state  (σ,  k)  at
inverse  temperature  β  for  free  fermions  on  the  lattice.  A  Green’s  function
with equal time variables (a closed fermion loop) is understood as G(0)σ   (k, τ  =
−0). To obtain the right weight and sign, one also has to ascribe the factor
(−1)N+Nl/  (2π)Nd to each diagram of order N, with Nl being the number of
closed fermion loops and d the dimensionality of the problem.
    All the  physical information we  will need is  contained in the  self-energy
Σ  σ  [1]. In analytic treatments, it is convenient to have Σ  σ  in the momentum–
imaginary-frequency representation, so that the Green’s function is obtained
from the Dyson equation by simple algebra:
                          [             ]   −1 − Σ  σ (p, ξ ) .                                                (7)
     [Gσ (p, ξ )]−1  =      G(0)σ   (p, ξ )

Numerically, we ﬁnd it more appropriate to work in the momentum–imaginary-
time representation, to avoid dealing with poles. This does not create a prob-
lem  with  ﬁnding  Gσ (p, ξ ),  since  Σ  σ (p, ξ )  is  readily  obtained from  Σ  σ (p, τ )
by a (fast) Fourier transform.
    The class of diagrams contributing to Σ  σ (p, τ ) is deﬁned by the following
requirements:  (i)  Each  diagram  has  two  special  vertices  having  one  open
fermionic end. These vertices are separated by the time interval τ  and their
open  ends  have  the  same spin  projection σ  and  momentum  p  which  enters
the  diagram  at  one  open  end  and  exits  at  the  other.  (ii)  Each  diagram  is
connected. (iii) Each diagram is irreducible, i.e., it can not be split into two
disconnected parts by cutting only a single fermionic line.

3    Updates

For the sake of algorithmic elegance, we choose to work with closed-loop di-
agrams that (formally) have no free  ends. To collect statistics  for Σ   in  this
representation, we  ﬁx  one  propagator, say  going  from  vertex  1  to  vertex  2,
and set its value to 1. Below, we refer to this special propagator as ‘measur-
ing’ propagator. Then, if  the propagator’s momentum  isp and the  vertices
have  times  τ1, τ 2  respectively,  we  are  measuring  Σ (p, τ 1 − τ2).  Note  that
Σ (p, τ ) is an anti-periodic function of τ (with τ = τ1 − τ2), so we can restrict
6             Kris Van Houcke et al.

ourselves to collecting statistics for 0 < τ  < β. For a given diagram, chang-
ing the measuring propagator—without changing the diagram struc  ture—is
straightforwardly done by the Swap  update.
    Swap. The update swaps the measuring propagator with one of the regular
propagators.  The  new  measuring  propagator  is  chosen  at  random,  and  its
value  is  set  to  1.  Correspondingly,  the  physical  value  of  the  old  measuring
propagator is restored, so that it becomes just a regular propagator.
    Assume  that  the  initial  measuring  propagator  has  to  be  replaced  with
G(0)α   (p, τ ), after we swap it with the propagator G(0)β   (p′, τ  ′). The acceptance
ratio is given by

     Pswap  =  |G(0)α   (p, τ )/G   (0)β   (p′, τ  ′)| .                                                               (8)

    The problem of generating diagrams for Σ  consists of two main tasks: one
should be able to (i) change the structure of the diagrams, and (ii) make sure
that  the  momentum  conservation  is  satisﬁed  in  every  vertex.  We  develop
a  scheme  that  fulﬁlls  these  tasks  by  performing  only  local  updates  of  the
diagram.  The  idea—in  the  spirit  of  the  worm  algorithm—is  to  introduce
non-physical diagrams in which momentum conservation is violated in some
special vertices (called worms). The smallest required number of such vertices
is  two.  All  updates  changing  the  topology  of  the  diagram  involve  worms.
When worms are deleted from the diagram we return to the physical subspace.
    To  be  speciﬁc,  we  introduce  the  following  notation.  One  of  the  three-
point vertices in which momentum conservation is violated, if any, is labeled
I. There is an excess momentum δ associated with I, which is deﬁned as the
diﬀerence between the incoming and the outgoing momenta in this vertex (see
Fig. 2). If present, I  always has one, and only one, conjugate vertex M with
an excess momentum −δ, as shown in Fig. 2. Clearly, the distinction between
I  and  M  is  merely  conventional, since  replacing δ  with  −δ  interchanges I
and M. There is  an important property of the two worms: once some path
from I to M is known, one can simply remove the worms by propagating the
excess momentum δ  along the path.




                  1p   I      p                                    '1p                  'pM




                     1q                        δ                      '1q

                p                               =−           )(             1p1+qδp                                  −−           )'p1'('                 1+q=δ

Fig. 2.  Worms. Graphically, we can picture the worms as vertices with conserving
momentum, by connecting the two with an extra line (thread) that transports the
momentum δ  from  I  to M. The indistinguishability of I  and M is seen from  the
fact  that  swapping  the  labels  I  and  M,  and  replacing  δ  →  −   δ  yields  the  same
original diagram.
                                                          Diagrammatic Monte Carlo             7

    We proceed now with the description of the updates. The Create/Delete
pair  switches  between  the  physical  and  non-physical  (worm)  diagrammatic
spaces  by  creating/deleting  I,  M.  Its  role  is  also  to  update  the  diagram’s
momenta.  The  Add/Remove  pair  changes  the  diagram  order.  In  these  up-
dates, we  add (remove) a vertex and delete  (create) I, M  on diﬀerent spin
components at the same time. The self-complementary updates Move and Re-
connect  are responsible for moving the worms in the diagram and changing
its topology, respectively.
    Create. This update is possible only—being rejected otherwise—when we
are in the  physical sector (Σ -sector), that is  when I,  M are absent. We  in-
troduce I,  M by selecting a propagator (line) at random and adding a mo-
mentum δ  to it (see Fig. 3). [Similarly, I  and M can be also created on the
two vertices of an interaction line.]
    Creating  two  worms  takes  the  diagram  from  the  Σ -sector  to  the  non-
physical  W -sector.  We  deﬁne  the  W -diagram  weight  by  exactly  the  same
rules  as  for  physical  ones  up  to  an  arbitrary  numeric  factor,  so  that  the
acceptance ratio for Create  is

     Pcreate  =  2N CN G(0)(p + δ, τ )/  (2π)dW (δ) G(0)(p, τ ) ,                          (9)
where 2N  is the total number of propagators (including the measuring prop-
agator) and W (δ) is the normalized distribution from which δ is drawn. The
variable  CN  is  an  extra  weighing  factor  which  is  assigned  to  a  diagram  of
order N  whenever the worm is present. To make transitions between the Σ -
and W -sectors eﬃciently, we choose   CN  =  C/  2N, where C  is a constant.
    The simplest choice for W (δ) is to assume a uniform distribution in the
ﬁrst Brillouin zone,  W (δ) = 1/  (2π)d. Since  I  and M are indistinguishable,
we ﬁnd it convenient to require that the leftmost worm is labeled I, and the
rightmost one M (see Fig. 3).


                  p                                                   I         ~       M
   2p                               1p       ~                   2p                    p         1p
                                             p            +=pδ


       2q                       1q                                  2q                       1q

        p                                          +=p−q=p         ~
              1                 q122                               p                                                                 +=                                                2p1−q1+=pδ2+qδ

Fig. 3.  Create update.


    The rest of the updates (except for Remove) apply only—being automat-
ically rejected otherwise—when   I,  M are present.
    Delete. Here, we ﬁrst check if I and M are connected by a single line and
proceed only if they are. We propose to remove I and M by adding −δ (+δ)
to the  momentum of the connecting line when it is incoming (outgoing) for
8             Kris Van Houcke et al.

I. If the  line connecting I  and M is a propagator, the acceptance ratio for
Delete  is given by the inverse of Eq. (9),

     Pdelete  =  (2π)dW (δ) G(0)(p, τ ) /   2N CN G(0)(p ± δ, τ ) .                       (10)

    Care  should  be  taken  in  the  special  case  when  I  and  M  are  connected
by  two  lines  (forming  a  closed  fermion  loop).  A  factor  of  2  [1/  2] should  be
included  in  Eq.  (10)  [Eq.  (9)],  because  the  excess  momentum  δ  can  be  at-
tributed to any of the two lines with probability 1/  2.

                           I       ~                                  ~
       3p            2p                    p                    3p    I    p     +2                    pδ~




                3q        2q                                              3q       2q


Fig. 4.  Example of Move left update.


    Move.  We  can  move  both  I  and  M  along  the  lines  through  the  whole
diagram. Moving a worm along a line is only allowed if there is no other worm
on this line. [Otherwise, the update is equivalent to Delete.] For example, to
move I  left (Fig. 4) we must add δ  to the line on the left from I. This will
restore the momentum conservation in I and create a momentum discrepancy
δ  in the vertex left from I. This is our new I, temporarily denoted as  ˜I, to
avoid confusion with the old one.
    The acceptance ratio of this move is given by

     Pmove  =  G(0)(p2 + δ, τ )/G   (0)(p2, τ ) ,                                                       (11)

with G(0)(p2, τ ) the outgoing propagator of I  before the update. Moving I
to the left or right is chosen with equal probability.
    Graphically, we can picture the worms as vertices with conserving momen-
tum, provided we draw an artiﬁcial thread directly connecting the worms and
transporting  the  momentum  δ  from  I  to  M  (see  Fig.  2).  In  this  language,
removing the worms means merging the thread with some path formed by the
lines  connecting  the  worms and adding  the  thread momentum  to  their  mo-
menta. If only a part of the connecting path is merged with the thread, this
results in moving the worms. This way of thinking visually tells us whether
we have to add or subtract δ  on lines while moving the worms.
    Moving  I,  M  “up”  or  “down”  along  an  interaction  line,  we  switch  to  a
diﬀerent  spin  component.  For  example,  to  move  I  down  (up)  (see  Fig.  5),
we  have  to  add  δ  (−δ)  to  the  dashed  line  (interaction)  momentum.  The
acceptance ratio for moving I  down is given by

     Pmove  =  U(q2 + δ)/U  (q2) .                                                                       (12)
                                                         Diagrammatic Monte Carlo             9

                    I                                                2p            1p
              2p             1p



                   2q                                                       q     +2δ


              4p             3p                                     4p    ~         3p
                                                                          I
Fig. 5.  Example of Move down update.


    Obviously, the move right/left/up/down updates are the same for M with
the only diﬀerence that instead of adding  ±δ to the lines we have to subtract
it.
    Reconnect. This  simple  update  can  be  performed—and  is  automatically
rejected otherwise—only if   I  and M occupy the same  spin component. One
swaps the incoming end of I  with that of M. It is important, however, that
the update changes the excess momentum δ associated with the worms. [It is
also worth noting that without invoking the worms such an update would be
generally  impossible  by  momentum  conservation.]  If  before  the  update  the
momenta  on  the  incoming  ends  of  I  and  M  were  p1  and  p2  respectively,
then after the update the new excess momentum is given by ˜δ = δ + p2 − p1.
    The acceptance ratio for Reconnect  is
               ⏐⏐⏐⏐G(0)(p1, τ M − τ1) G(0)(p2, τ I − τ2)⏐⏐⏐⏐ ,                                       (13)
     Prec  =    G(0)(p1, τ I − τ1) G(0)(p2, τ M − τ2)

with τI, τM the imaginary times of the vertices at which I and M are located,
respectively. The variable τ1 (τ2) gives the imaginary time of the vertex from
which  a  propagator runs  to  the  vertex  of  I  (M)  with  momentum  p1  (p2),
before the update.


            I     1p                                  p   −1δ    1p




                                                              δ



             M      2p                                 p    +2    2pδ

Fig. 6.  Add update.


    Add. This update, adding a new interaction line, is only possible—being
automatically  rejected  otherwise—if    I  and  M  have  diﬀerent   spin  compo-
nents. For deﬁniteness, we insert the new interaction line between the propa-
gator coming into I and the one coming into M, as in Fig. 6. At a randomly
chosen  time,  these  lines  are  broken and  the  four-point  vertex  is  inserted  in
10           Kris Van Houcke et al.

the breaks. In this particular realization, there is no freedom in choosing the
momentum along the new dashed line: we set it equal to δ, which means that
the update inevitably deletes I  and M.
    The acceptance ratio for Add  is
                                        ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐                                            ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
     Padd =              U(δ)            G(0)↑   (p1 − δ, τ I − τ) G(0)↑   (p1, τ  − τ1)
               (N + 1) W1(τ) CN                       G(0)↑   (p1, τ I − τ1)
                 ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐G(0)                                         ⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ ,                               (14)
              ×      ↓   (p2 + δ, τ M − τ) G(0)↓   (p2, τ  − τ2)
                               G(0)↓   (p2, τ M − τ2)

where N is the order of the diagram and W1(τ) is the distribution from which
the time τ  of the new interaction vertex is drawn. We have assumed that I
occupies the spin-up component, without loss of generality.
    Remove. This update is a straightforward inverse of the previous one. It
can be performed (accepted) only in the Σ -sector. It simultaneously removes
an  interaction  line  and  creates  a  pair  of  worms.  If  the  removed  line  had
momentum q, for I  and M we shall have δ = q.
    In view of the indistinguishability of I  and M, we require that I  (M) is
created on  the  spin-up  (spin-down)  line.  The  acceptance  ratio  of  this  move
is  given  by  the  inverse  of  Eq.  (14)  with  N  being  the  ﬁnal  diagram  order
now. Adding or removing an interaction line can also involve a change of the
measuring propagator when this propagator is the incoming propagator of I
or M.

4    Useful  Tricks and  Relations

Connectivity  and  irreducibility.   The  updates discussed above are con-
structed  in such  a  way that  disconnected physical diagrams are never  sam-
pled.  In the  Σ -sector, the  only  update  that can change the  topology of  the
diagram  is  the  Swap  move.  However,  swapping  the  measuring  propagator
cannot  create  a  disconnected  piece.  When  we  are  dealing  with  a  diagram
in the W -sector, Add-Remove  and Reconnect  are the only updates that can
change  the  topology  of  the  diagram.  These  updates  can  create  two  discon-
nected pieces in the W -sector. In this case, however, each disconnected piece
will contain one worm end. Going back to the Σ -sector amounts to bringing
the worm ends together via Add  or Reconnect, at the same time restoring the
connectivity.
    To keep track of the irreducibility of the diagrams, we use a hash table of
lines momenta. The idea is that whenever the diagram is reducible, there is at
least one propagator which carries the total momentum of the diagram. The
reducibility of the diagram can then be established easily by checking the hash
table  and  ﬁnding  a  momentum  equal  to  that  of  the  measuring  propagator.
We also check irreducibility right before each measurement of the self-energy.
                                                        Diagrammatic Monte Carlo           11

    Bold  propagators.  The  purpose  of  this  trick  is  to  reduce  the  space
of  diagrams  sampled  by  Monte  Carlo.  As  already  mentioned,  this  becomes
essential when one is dealing with a sign-alternating series, in which the sign
problem scales exponentially with the number of diagrams. Basically, the idea
follows from Dyson’s equation, which allows one to reconstruct the complete
function G from its elementary building blocks Σ . Next, in the series for Σ ,
one has to eliminate all diagrams already accounted for by the  replacement
G(0) → G done for all propagator lines. At this point the scheme becomes self-
consistent. In addition, one can employ geometrical series to deﬁne screened
interaction  lines,  and,  correspondingly,  eliminate  all  diagrams  with  simple
fermionic loops. At the time of writing we are in the process of implementing
the full version of the bold-line trick.
    In  the  simplest  implementation,  we  build  the  diagrams  on  a  modiﬁed
Green’s  function  ˜G  instead  of  G(0).  The  function   ˜G  is  obtained  from  G(0)
by  incorporating  the  lowest  order  “tadpole”  diagram  (i.e.,  the  mean-ﬁeld
solution)  self-consistently.  This  reduces  the  number  of  sampled  diagrams,
since  all  diagrams  that  can  be  split  into  two  disconnected  parts  by  cutting
a single interaction line should be left out, being already taken into account
in the new Green’s function. Mathematically, ˜G is obtained from Eq. (7) by
simply shifting the chemical potential, µ σ  −→ µ σ −Σ  (1)σ   , where Σ  (1)σ    = Unσ  is
the self-energy in the lowest order and nσ  is the density of the component σ.
In principle, updates  creating tadpole-contributions can simply  be  rejected.
However, to keep the Markov sampling of diagrams ergodic, the presence of
a  limited  number  of closed propagators  ˜Gσ (k, τ   = −0) is  allowed, but  such
diagrams are excluded from the statistics of Σ  σ .
    Resummation of  the  diagrams.   The use of resummation techniques
is  a  crucial  ingredient  of  the  diagrammatic  Monte  Carlo  approach  [4].  We
found  that  the  resummation methods  eﬀectively  reduce the  error  bars, and
improve convergence of the Monte Carlo results. In general, for any quantity
of interest—in our case, self-energy—one constructs partial su    ms
                   N∗∑
     Σ (N∗)  =          DN F (N∗)N      ,                                                                            (15)
                  N=1
deﬁned as sums of all terms up to order N∗ with the N-th order terms being
multiplied by the factor F (N∗)N     , which has a step-like form as a function of N:
in the limit of large N∗  and N  ≪ N∗  the multiplication factors F  approach
unity  while  for  N  →  N∗  they  suppress  higher-order  contributions  in  such
a  way  that  the  series  ∑   ∞N=1 DN F (N∗)N       becomes  convergent. The  only  other
requirement  is  that  the  crossover region  from  unity  to  zero  has  to  increase
with N∗. There are inﬁnitely many ways to construct multiplication factors
satisfying these conditions. And this yields an important consistency check:
ﬁnal results have to be  independent of the choice of  F . In the Ces`aro-Riesz
summation method we have
     F (N∗)N       =  [(N∗ − N + 1)/N   ∗]δ ,        (Ces`aro-Riesz)  .                                (16)
12           Kris Van Houcke et al.

Here  δ  >  0  is  an  arbitrary  parameter  (δ  =  1  corresponds  to  the  Ces`aro
method).  The  freedom  of  choosing  the  value  of  Riesz’s  exponent δ  can  be
used  to  optimize  the  convergence  properties  of  Σ (N∗).  Empirically  it  was
found that the factor

                           N∗∑
     F (N∗)N       =  C(N∗)     exp [  −(N∗ + 1)2/m  (N∗ − m + 1)]   ,                       (17)
                          m=N

where C(N∗) is such that F (N∗)1       = 1, often leads to a faster convergence [4].
    We proceed as follows. With the series truncated at order N∗, we deter-
mine  the  physical quantity of interest (say, number  density  or energy), and
then extrapolate its dependence on N∗ to the N∗ → ∞ limit.
    Density and energy. The density is obtained from the Green’s function
through the standard relation
             ∫        dk
     nσ   =         (2π)d Gσ (k, τ  = −0) ,                                                               (18)
               BZ
where the integration is over the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. Analogously, the kinetic
(hopping) energy is found as
                     ∫        dk
     E(kin)σ      /V     =  (2π)d εkGσ (k, τ  = −0) ,                                                (19)
                       BZ
and the potential (interaction) energy is obtained via
                                     ∫        dk   [                       ]
     2E(pot)σ      /V     =  limτ ′→τ +0    (2π)d    −  ∂∂τ  − εk + µ σ     Gσ (k, τ  − τ′) , (20)
                                       BZ
where V  is the volume of the system.

5    Illustrative  Results

To illustrate the application of DiagMC, we simulated the equations of state—
density  and  energy  as  functions  of  chemical  potential  and  temperature—in
one (1D) and three (3D) dimensions. Diagrammatically, there is no qualita-
tive diﬀerence between 1D and higher-dimensional cases. Meanwhile, in 1D,
where  fermions  are  equivalent  to  hard-core  bosons,  we  have  the  advantage
of comparing DiagMC results with very accurate answers obtained with the
bosonic worm algorithm [14].
    By the (discussed in the Introduction) Dyson argument, we expect that at
any  ﬁnite  temperature  the  thermodynamic  functions  are  analytic  functions
of  U  in  a  certain  vicinity  of  the  point  U   =  0,  because  this  point  is  not
singular  in  the  case  of  the  discrete  fermionic  system.  Correspondingly,  the
expansion in powers of U  (that, by dimensional analysis, can be understood
as the expansion in powers of the dimensionless parameter U/T   ) is supposed
to  be  convergent  at  small  enough  U,  or,  equivalently,  large  enough  T .  In
                                                        Diagrammatic Monte Carlo           13

1D  there  are  no  phase  transitions  at  any  ﬁnite  T ,  so  that  one  can  expect
that  the  expansion  in  powers  of  U  is  convergent  (or  at  least  resummable)
down to arbitrarily low temperatures. In higher dimensions, an essential non-
analyticity  of  thermodynamic  functions  appears  due  to  phase  transitions.
Hence, the simplest version of DiagMC described in this work is expected to
work only at high enough temperatures.
    Note  that  employing  resummation  techniques  is  important  not  only  for
extending the method to divergent series, or improving the series convergence
properties, but also for estimating systematic errors due to extrapolation from
a ﬁnite number of terms we are able to calculate.
    The  simulation  results  (plotted  versus  the  inverse of  the  maximum  dia-
gram order N∗) for 1D and 3D and diﬀerent resummation methods are shown
in Fig. 7. In 1D the horizontal straight lines in both energy and density plots
mark the exact answers obtained from simulations of two-component bosons
[14]. The computational eﬀort in 3D was about 4800 CPU-hours. Note that
the error bars in the ﬁnal answer are dominated by the systematic  N∗ → ∞
extrapolation errors which  are  estimated  from  the  spread of  results  for  dif-
ferent extrapolation ﬁts and resummation methods. In particular, for density
in  1D  the  relative  uncertainty  due  to  extrapolation  is  of  the  order  of  5%,
suggesting that going to  higher  N∗  is  desirable, which is  only  possible with
further implementation of the bold-line tricks.

6    Conclusion

We  have  developed  a  diagrammatic  Monte  Carlo  scheme  for  a  system  of
interacting  fermions.  For  illustrative  results, we  have  obtained  equations  of
state (density and energy as functions of chemical potential and temperature)
for  the  repulsive Hubbard model.  In its  current version, the  scheme applies
to the range of temperatures above the critical point. Generalizations of the
scheme  to  temperatures  below  the  critical  point  are  possible  by  using  one
of  the  following  two  strategies  (as  well  as  their  combination).  (i)  A  small
term  explicitly  breaking  the  symmetry  (relevant  to  the  critical  point)  can
be  introduced  into  the  Hamiltonian.  The  phase  transition  then  becomes  a
crossover, and the convergence/resummability of series is likely to take place
at any temperature. (ii) Anomalous propagators can be introduced. The latter
trick naturally involves the bold-line technique which is important on its own,
even  above  the  critical  point,  since  it  reduces  the  number  of  diagrams  and
thus alleviates the sign problem.
    Tolerance  to  the  sign  problem  is  the  single  most  important  feature  of
DiagMC. One can formulate the sign problem as the impossibility of obtain-
ing results with small error bars for system sizes which allow a reliable and
controlled  extrapolation  to  the  thermodynamic  limit.  Within  the  DiagMC
approach  the  thermodynamic  limit  is  obtained  for  free,  while,  as  demon-
14           Kris Van Houcke et al.































Fig. 7.  The number density nσ  and the total  energy density Eσ /V    per spin  com-
ponent in 1D [panels (a), (b)] with U  = 4. 0, µ ↑ ,  ↓  = − 0. 5, and T  = 0. 3,  and in 3D
[panels (c), (d)] with U  = 4. 0, µ ↑ ,  ↓  = 1. 5, and T  = 0. 5 plotted as functions of the in-
verse of the maximum diagram order N∗ . The exact results in 1D, nσ  = 0. 2718 and
Eσ /V     =  − 0. 3613,  were  obtained  from  simulations  of  two-component  bosons  [14].
The results of diﬀerent resummation procedures are shown—C  es`aro  sum (circles),
Ces`aro-Riesz  with    δ = 2 (triangles),  Ces`aro-Riesz  with    δ = 4  (inverted triangles),
and  resummation  with  F N∗N    given  by  Eq.  (17)  (diamonds),  and  bare  series  with-
out  resummation  (squares).  The  solid  lines  show  the  best  ﬁts  [linear  for  Ces`aro,
polynomial of order δ for Ces`aro-Riesz, and exponential for Eq. (17)].


strated  in  this  work,  an  extrapolation to  the  inﬁnite  diagram order  can  be
done sensibly before the error bars explode.

7    Acknowledgements

The  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  under  Grant
PHY-0653183, the  Fund  for  Scientiﬁc  Research  -  Flanders  (FWO),  and  by
the DARPA OLE program. Part of the simulations ran on the Hreidar cluster
at ETH Z¨urich.
                                                         Diagrammatic Monte Carlo           15
References

1.  A.L.  Fetter  and  J.D.  Walecka:  Quantum  Theory  of  Many-Particle  Systems
    (Dover, 2003)
2.  N.V. Prokof’ev, B.V. Svistunov, and I.S. Tupitsyn: JETP87, 310 (1998); N.V.
    Prokof’ev and B.V. Svistunov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2514 (1998)
3.  M. Troyer and U.-J. Wiese, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 170201 (2005)
4.  N.   Prokof’ev   and   B.   Svistunov:   Phys.   Rev.   B  77,   020408(R)   (2008);
    arXiv:0801.0911  (to appear in Phys. Rev. B)
5.  T. Maier, M. Jarrell, T. Pruschke, and M.H. Hettler, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1027
    (2005)
6.  N. Prokof’ev, and B. Svistunov: Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 250201 (2007)
7.  N. Metropolis, A.W. Rosenbluth, M.N. Rosenbluth, A.H. Teller, and E. Teller:
    J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1087 (1953)
8.  W.K. Hastings: Biometrika 57, 97 (1970)
9.  A.S. Mishchenko, N.V. Prokof’ev, A. Sakamoto, and B.V. Svistunov: Phys. Rev.
    B 62, 6317 (2000)
10.  E.A.  Burovski,  A.S.  Mishchenko,  N.V.  Prokof’ev,  and  B.V.  Svistunov:  Phys.
    Rev. Lett. 87, 186402 (2001)
11.  E. Burovski, N. Prokof’ev, B. Svistunov, and M. Troyer: Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
    160402 (2006); New J. Phys. 8, 153 (2006)
12.  N. V. Prokof’ev,  B. V. Svistunov, and  I. S. Tupitsyn: Phys. Lett. A 238,  253
    (1998)
13.  F.J. Dyson: Phys. Rev. 85, 631 (1952)
14.  The worm code for the two-component Bose Hubbard model is the courtesy of
    Barbara Capogrosso-Sansone and S¸ebnem G¨une¸s S¨oyler.