  Proposal of a new quantum annealing schedule
    for studying quantum annealing of transverse
                                 ﬁeld Ising models

                                     Chiaki Yamaguchi∗

   Tokyo Quantum Computing, Haramura 17217-1689, Suwagun,
                                Nagano 391-0115, Japan





                                             Abstract
           Recently, Heim, Rønnow, Isakov and Troyer [Science  348 (2015) 215]
       have reported that Monte Carlo simulations for the Ising spin glass model
       on the square lattice in the physically relevant continuous-imaginary-time
       limit  do  not  show  superiority  of  quantum  annealing  (QA)  using  trans-
       verse  ﬁeld  against  classical  annealing  (CA).  Although  the  QA  schedule
       that they had used has been using conventionally, however the QA sched-
       ule  mathematically  has  no  guarantee  that  the  used  schedule  is  the  best
       QA  schedule  for  performance  of  optimization.    We  propose  a  new  QA
       schedule for studying transverse-ﬁeld-based quantum versus classical  an-
       nealing  of  the  Ising  model.  The  present  QA  schedule  utilizes  a  smallest
       eﬀective transverse ﬁeld derived in this article.  This QA sc hedule is made
       for  the  comparison  between  the  system  with  no  transverse  ﬁeld  and  the
       system  with  the  smallest  eﬀective  transverse  ﬁeld.   As  a  case  study,  we
       study  QA  of  the  Ising  spin  glass  model  on  the  square  lattice  at  low  but
       ﬁnite  temperature.   A  Monte  Carlo  algorithm  using  the  physically  rel-
       evant  continuous-imaginary-time  limit  is  performed.   As  the  simulation
       results,  we  show  superiority  of  QA  against  CA  when  the annealing  time
       is suﬃciently spent.

1    Introduction

The  quantum  annealing  (QA)  is  an  optimization  method  utilizing  quantum
eﬀect[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].  By  using  QA, the  solutions of  given optimization  prob-
lems  are approximately or  exactly obtained.  QA  is  also related to  a  quantum
computation by adiabatic evolution[7, 8].

   ∗ Email:info@to-qc.com




                                                  1
    QA is proposed as an alternative of the classical annealing (CA)[9].  In CA,
the temperature is operated from high to low in order to utilize thermal ﬂuctua-
tions.  On the other hand, in QA, external ﬁelds (and/or exchange interactions)
generating  quantum  eﬀect  are  operated  from  large  to  zero  in  order  to  utilize
quantum ﬂuctuations.  These annealings help to make the systems escape from
local minima of the free energy, and the systems reach low-energy states eﬀec-
tively.
    The understandings of QA are recently becoming signiﬁcant in relation to the
D-Wave chip[10].  This chip is designed to perform QA for solving optimization
problems.  The occurrence of quantum properties for this chip is shown[10].
    We simulate QA of real-physical systems in this article, and we do not sim-
ulate  QA as  a  classical optimization method  in  this  article.  Recently,  it  is  re-
ported in Ref. [11] that Monte Carlo simulations for the Ising spin glass model
on the square lattice in the physically relevant continuous-imaginary-time limit
do  not  show  superiority  of  QA  using  transverse  ﬁeld  against  CA.  In  order  to
study physically relevant systems, we use a continuous-imaginary-time quantum
Monte Carlo algorithm in this article.  In addition, we investigate the Ising spin
glass model on the square lattice.
    Although the  QA schedule used in Ref. [11] has been using conventionally,
however the QA schedule mathematically has no guarantee that the used sched-
ule  is  the  best  QA  schedule  for  performance  of  optimization.   We  propose  a
new  QA  schedule  for  studying  transverse-ﬁeld-based quantum  versus  classical
annealing  of  the  Ising  model.   This  QA  schedule  utilizes  a  smallest  eﬀective
transverse ﬁeld derived in this article.  We derive this ﬁeld based on a discussion
of percolation of spin correlation per spin along the continuous-imaginary-time
direction.   The  present  QA  schedule  is  made  for  the  comparison  between  the
system with no transverse ﬁeld and the system with the smallest eﬀe ctive trans-
verse  ﬁeld.   By  this  comparison,  the  superiority  of  QA  (or  CA)  can  be  made
clear.
    We  apply  a  quantum  Monte  Carlo  algorithm  [14]  proposed  by  Nakamura
and Ito.  This algorithm uses the physically relevant continuous-imaginary-time
limit.   This  algorithm  is  a  Glauber-dynamics-like  algorithm  (a  heat-bath-like
algorithm)  which  performs  single-spin  ﬂips  in  the  real  space  and  cluster  ﬂips
in  the  imaginary-time space.  The  Glauber  dynamics  is  suited  to  the  study  of
the dynamical features of physical systems[12, 13].  By applying this algorithm,
observing a true relaxation of the original system is expected[14].  The mathe-
matical form of this algorithm is directly related to the derivation of a smallest
eﬀective  transverse  ﬁeld  derived  in  this  article,  thus  we  use  this  algo rithm  in
this article
    We compare three annealings:  the present one, a conventional quantum one
(used  for  a  quantum computation  by  adiabatic  evolution) and  a  classical one.
The simulation results for the annealings are shown in this article.
    This  article  is  organized  as  follows.   The  quantum  annealing  and  the  spin
glass  model  are  explained  in§2.   The  derivation  of  a  quantum  Monte  Carlo
algorithm  by  Nakamura  and  Ito  [14]  is  described  in§3.   The  way  of  applying
this algorithm is written in§4.  The diﬀerences between this algorithm and the


                                                  2
related algorithms [15, 16] are mentioned in§4.  Quantities that we treat in this
article  are  described  in§5.   A  smallest  eﬀective  transverse  ﬁeld  is  derived  in
§6.  A new QA schedule is proposed in§6.  Simulation results are shown in§7.
Concluding remarks are in§8.

2    The  quantum  annealing  and  the  spin  glass
       model

In terms of theoretical physics, the quantum annealing can be to investigate a
time dependent HamiltonianH(t) which has quantum eﬀect terms.  Usually, the
HamiltonianH(t) can be written as
                                  H(t) = J(t)HP  + γ(t)HQ ,                                          (1)
where  t  is  the  time  from  t  =  0  to  t  =  TI. HP  is  the  problem  Hamiltonian
that an optimization problem is written. HQ  is a quantum eﬀect Hamiltonian
for  generating  quantum  eﬀect.    When  TI  is  a  small  number,  this  annealing
corresponds to a fast annealing, and, when TI  is a large number, this annealing
corresponds to a slow annealing.  J(t) is an increasing function for t, or J(t) is
a constant.  J(t) increases from 0 to 1 for example.  γ(t) is a decreasing function
for  t.  γ(t)  decreases  from  a  large value  to  zero  for  example,  or  γ(t)  decreases
from 1 to 0 for example.  A method using a pulse of the transverse ﬁeld is also
proposed[16].
    When  γ(t)  gives  zero  from  t = 0  to  t = TI  while  the  value  of  J(t)  (or  the
temperature) changes, this annealing is  a classical annealing.  When there is a
time that γ(t) gives non-zero, this annealing is a quantum annealing.
    The problem HamiltonianHP  is written as the form of the Ising spin glass
model  called  the  Edwards-Anderson model.   The  HamiltonianHP  is  given by
[17, 18, 19, 20]
                                     HP  =−  ∑         τijSiSj ,                                              (2)
                                                 <ij>
where  <  ij  >  denotes  nearest-neighbor  pairs,  Si  is  a  state  of  a  spin  at  site  i,
Si =±1, and this spin is called the Ising spin.  The value of τij  is given by the
problem that is asked to solve.  In the spin glass model, the probability of giving
the value of τij  is
                                  P (τij) =  12δτij, −1 + 12δτij, 1                                         (3)
for example.  Here, δ is the  Kronecker delta.  We  use the  value of τij  obtained
by using Eq. (3) in this article.  The Ising spin glass model using P (τij) is called
the±J  Ising spin glass model.  We investigate the±J  Ising spin glass model on
the square lattice with periodic boundary conditions in this article.
    The quantum eﬀect HamiltonianHQ, which is investigated in this article, is
given by [1, 3, 4, 5]
                                                      N∑
                                         HQ =−           σ xi  ,                                                   (4)
                                                     i=1

                                                   3
where σ ki  is the k component of the Pauli matrix at site i.  N  is the number of
sites (spins) in the whole system.  The Pauli matrices are
             (     0    1)            (     0 −i   )                    (     1      0)
      σ x =      1    0    ,     σ  y =   i      0       and    σ z =      0 −1         .             (5)

When the measurement axis is chosen to be z, the external ﬁeld by σ x is called
the  transverse ﬁeld.  An  Ising  spin under  the  transverse ﬁeld  corresponds to  a
quantum bit in this study.
    By using Eqs.(1), (2) and (4), the HamiltonianH(t) is also written as

                                                                    N∑
                        H(t) =−J(t)  ∑          τijσ zi σ zj− γ(t)      σ xi  .                              (6)
                                          <ij>                      i=1

We study this HamiltonianH(t).

3    The derivation of a continuous-imaginary-time
       quantum  Monte  Carlo  algorithm

The derivation of a quantum Monte Carlo algorithm by Nakamura and Ito [14]
is  described  in  this  section,  since  the  mathematical  form  of  this  algorithm  is
directly related to the derivation of a smallest eﬀective transverse  ﬁeld derived
in this article.  The way of applying this algorithm is described in§4.
    The  Glauber  dynamics  is  suited  to  the  study  of  the  dynamical  features  of
physical systems[12, 13].  By applying the Glauber dynamics, discussions for dy-
namical features as a physical system are possible[12, 13].  The Glauber dynam-
ics is a heat-bath algorithm for the Ising model.  We  use a Glauber-dynamics-
like  algorithm  (a  heat-bath-like  algorithm)  which  performs  single-spin  ﬂips  in
the real space and cluster ﬂips in the imaginary-time space.  For the  real-space
direction, this algorithm performs single-spin ﬂips like as the Glauber dynamics
does.  For the imaginary-time direction, the continuous-imaginary-time limit is
applied.
    We use the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition given by [21]


                                                                                 β
                e−β (HA+HB+HC) =   lim                                           ∆   ˜t ,                   (7)
                                          ∆  ˜t→0(e−HA∆  ˜te−HB∆  ˜te−HC∆  ˜t)

where ∆ ˜t≡    βM , M  is called the Trotter number, and ˜t is called the  imaginary
time.  β  is the inverse temperature, β  = 1/  (kBTE), TE  is the temperature, and
kB  is  the  Boltzmann  constant.  The  physically  relevant continuous-imaginary-
time  limit  mentioned  in  Ref.  [11]  corresponds  to  the  limit  of  ∆ ˜t→  0  in  this
article.  By this decomposition, the d-dimensional quantum system is treated as
the d + 1-dimensional classical system.  A continuous-imaginary-time quantum
Monte  Carlo  algorithm  is  used  in  this  study.   This  means  that  the  system  for



                                                  4
∆ ˜t→ 0  is  directly investigated.  This  study  is  not aﬀected by the  error of the
Suzuki-Trotter decomposition.  There is a relation[21]:

                        ⟨σ zx|eβγ (t)σ x|σ zy⟩ =  12(eβγ (t) + σ zx σ zye−βγ (t)) ,                           (8)

where σ zx, σ  zy  =±1.  Thus, the partition function Z(t) is written as [21]
                                         ∑          {                 ∑
                      Z(t) =   lim             exp     J(t)∆ ˜t ∑           τijσ zikσ zjk
                                 ∆  ˜t→0{σ z                     k∈ρ  ij∈ρ
                                           ik}
                               ∑                                                           }
                      + ∑           log exp(γ(t)∆ ˜t) + σ zikσ zil exp(−γ(t)∆ ˜t)2            ,                (9)
                         kl∈ρ   i∈ρ
where ρ is the set of the coordinates of the weights for the decomposed partition
function  in  the  d + 1-dimensional  classical  system.    The  coordinates  of  ρ  is
somewhat complicated[21], but there is no need to understand the coordinates,
because of taking the continuous-imaginary-time limit.  By performing ∆ ˜t→ 0,
the imaginary time becomes a continuous space.  In Eq. (9), the term for σ zikσ zjk
is  a  term  for  the  interaction  of  real-space  direction,  and  the  term  for  σ zikσ zil
is  a  term  for  the  interaction of  imaginary-time direction.  The  imaginary-time
direction  has  periodic  boundary  conditions.   The  size  of  the  imaginary-time
direction is the same with the inverse temperature β.  Eq. (9) is also written for
∆ ˜t→ 0 as                                             [
                    Z(t)    =      lim      ∑     exp   J(t)∆ ˜t ∑      ∑    τijσ zikσ zjk

                                   ∆  ˜t→0 {σ z                    k∈ρ  ij∈ρ
                                              ik}
                                                             ∑    1− σ zikσ zil ]
                                   + log(γ(t)∆ ˜t) ∑                    2          .                            (10)
                                                       kl∈ρ  i∈ρ
    In  order  to  derive  this  algorithm,  we  derive  weights  for  graph  representa-
tion.  The  framework of deriving weights for  graph representation is  described
in Ref. [22].  We  deﬁne the weight of two spins along imaginary-time direction
as w(σ zik, σ  zil).  w(σ zik, σ  zil) is given by
                                                 [                                ]
                         w(σ zik, σ  zil) = exp    log(γ(t)∆ ˜t) 1− σ zikσ zil2     .                          (11)

We deﬁne the weight for  σ zikσ zil = 1 as wpara.  By using Eq. (11), we obtain

                                                wpara = 1 .                                                      (12)
We deﬁne the weight for  σ zikσ zil =−1 as wanti.  By using Eq. (11), we obtain
                                            wanti = γ(t)∆ ˜t .                                                 (13)
We deﬁne the weight of graph for connecting two spins as  w(gconn).  We deﬁne
the weight of graph for cutting two spins as w(gcut).  We are able to write
                                    wpara = w(gconn) + w(gcut) ,                                       (14)


                                                      5
and
                                             wanti = w(gcut) .                                                 (15)
By using Eqs. (12) - (15), we obtain
                                        w(gconn) = 1− γ(t)∆ ˜t ,                                           (16)
and
                                           w(gcut) = γ(t)∆ ˜t .                                               (17)
We deﬁne the probability of cutting two spins for σ zikσ zil = 1 as Ppara(gcut).  We
deﬁne  the  probability  of  cutting  two  spins  for  σ zikσ zil  =−1  as  Panti(gcut).   We
are able to write

                         Ppara(gcut) =           w(gcut)w(gconn) + w(gcut)  = γ(t)∆ ˜t ,                         (18)

and
                                     Panti(gcut) =  w(gcut)w(gcut)  = 1 .                                        (19)

    We  calculate  the  probability  of  giving  the  number  of  cuts  per  spin  for
Ppara(gcut) of Eq. (18) in the continuous-imaginary-time limit.  We deﬁne  nadd
as the number of cuts per spin for parallel spins σ σ ′ = 1 along the imaginary-
time  direction.   By  using  Eq.  (18),  the  probability  P (nadd)  of  giving  nadd  is
obtained as                      (         β          )


                                                                          β
     P (nadd)    =      lim           ∆  ˜t− nkinknadd   (1− Ppara)∆   ˜t −nkink−nadd(Ppara)nadd
                          ∆  ˜t→0
                    =        1nadd!(γ(t)β)nadd exp(−γ(t)β) ,                                               (20)
         (     x )
where        y      ≡         x!y!(x−y)!, and nkink  is the number of kinks per spin.  The kink
means  the  position  of  antiparallel  spins  σ σ ′  =−1  along  the  imaginary-time
direction.   The  position  ˜tadd  of  the  cut  for  parallel  spins  σ σ ′  =  1  along  the
imaginary-time direction is obtained by
                                                ˜tadd = βR ,                                                      (21)

where R is a pseudorandom number for 0≤ R < 1.  By using Eq. (19), cuts are
added for antiparallel spins σ σ ′ =−1 along the imaginary-time direction with
probability one.  Thus the number  of cuts  per  spin for  antiparallel spins along
the imaginary-time direction is nkink.  Therefore, the number of all cuts per spin
along the imaginary-time direction, ncut, is given by
                                          ncut = nadd + nkink .                                             (22)
    This  algorithm  performs  single-spin  ﬂips  in  the  real  space.   The  transition
probability P (E→ E′) for the energy transition E→ E′  is given by

                                   P (E→ E′) =         e−βE ′e−βE  + e−βE ′  .                                     (23)


                                                       6
Cuts  are  added  along  the  imaginary-time  direction,  and  the  spin  correlations
along the imaginary-time direction are cut at the positions of the cuts.  There-
fore, P (E→ E′) is only calculated for real spaces.  When there is no cut, this
algorithm becomes the Glauber dynamics.

4    The  way  of  applying  this  Monte  Carlo  algo-
       rithm

We describe the way of applying this algorithm.  The derivation of this algorithm
is in§3.  When the transverse ﬁeld is not imposed, this algorithm becomes the
Glauber dynamics.
    One Monte Carlo step (sweep) is as follows:
   1.  The number of cuts for parallel spins along the imaginary-time direction,
       nadd, is calculated by using Eq. (20) for each spin, and the positions of cuts
       for parallel spins along the imaginary-time direction, ˜tadd, are calculated
       nadd  times by using Eq. (21) for each spin.  Moreover, cuts are placed on
       all kinks with probability one (Eq. (19)).  Clusters are detected by all the
       cuts.  The number of clusters, NC, is counted up.  When there is no cut,
       NC  gives N  (the number of spins).
   2.  One  of  the  detected  clusters  is  randomly  picked  up,  and  the  cluster  is
       ﬂipped with the probability of Eq. (23).  The trials of ﬂipping clusters are
       performed NC  times.
   3.  All the cuts are deleted.
   4.  Quantities are sampled if needing to sample the quantities.
One Monte Carlo step is a unit of time used in this study.  This time is called the
Monte Carlo time.  We investigate physical systems under this time evolution.
    Fig.  1  shows  a  sketch  of  one  Monte  Carlo  step.   Full  lines  correspond  to
worldline segments with spin up, and broken lines correspond to worldline seg-
ments  with  spin  down.   The  horizontal  axis  indicates  the  real  space,  and  the
longitudinal axis indicates the imaginary time.  A discrete space is assumed for
the real-space direction, and a continuous space is assumed for the imaginary-
time direction.  The imaginary-time direction has periodic boundary conditions.
(a) Spin states are shown.  (b) Cuts are added.  Cuts for kinks are represented
as bars, and cuts for parallel spins along the imaginary-time direction are repre-
sented as crosses.  Cuts for kinks are added with the probability one according
to Eq. (19).  Cuts for parallel spins along the imaginary-time direction are added
according  to  Eqs.(20)  and  (21).   (c)  Cluster  ﬂips  are  performed.   One  of  clus-
ters  is  randomly  picked  up,  and  the  cluster  is  ﬂipped  with  the  probability  of
Eq. (23).  Cluster ﬂips are tried for the number of clusters.  (d) Cuts are deleted,
and quantities are sampled.
    Fig.  2  shows a  sketch of  one cluster  ﬂip.  The  horizontal axis  indicates  the
real  space,  and  the  longitudinal  axis  indicates  the  imaginary  time.   (a)  Spin


                                                 7
                 (a)                                  (b)

                    t~                                    t~



                                  r                                     r
                 (c)                                  (d)

                    t~                                    t~



                                 r                                     r



Figure 1:   A sketch of one Monte Carlo step.  Full lines correspond to worldline
segments with spin up, and broken lines correspond to worldline segments with
spin  down.   The  horizontal  axis  indicates  the  real  space,  and  the  longitudinal
axis  indicates  the  imaginary  time.   (a)  Spin  states  are  shown.   (b)  Cuts  are
added.  Cuts for kinks are represented as bars, and cuts for parallel spins along
the  imaginary-time  direction  are  represented  as  crosses.   (c)  Cluster  ﬂips  are
performed.  (d) Cuts are deleted, and quantities are sampled.


states are shown before a cluster C1  is ﬂipped.  (b) Spin states are shown after
the  cluster  C1  was  ﬂipped.   If  the  transition  probability  P (E→ E′)  of  Fig.  2
is calculated, P (E→ E′) is obtained as P (E→ E′) = 1/ {1 + exp[−2J(t)(˜t1−
˜t3)τ12 + 2J(t)(˜t1− 2˜t2 + ˜t3)τ23]}.
    One simulation is as follows:

   1.  A problem (a set of τij) is prepared.
   2.  Initial states of spins at t = 0 are made by using some Monte Carlo steps,
       and quantities are sampled for t = 0.

   3.  One Monte Carlo step is performed.  t← t + 1 is executed.  Quantities are
       sampled for t.

   4.  When t = TI, the simulation is closed.



                                                   8
                 (a)  t~                                  (b)C1t~        C1
                      t1~                                  t1~
                      t2~                                  t2~
                      t3~                                  t3~



                             1     2     3      r                 1     2     3      r


Figure  2:    A  sketch  of  one cluster  ﬂip.  The  horizontal axis  indicates  the  real
space,  and the  longitudinal axis  indicates  the  imaginary time.  (a) Spin  states
are  shown  before  a  cluster  C1  is  ﬂipped.   (b)  Spin  states  are  shown  after  the
cluster C1  was ﬂipped.


By  repeating  the  above  procedures,  many  simulations  are  performed,  and  the
average values of quantities are calculated.
    We  describe  the  diﬀerences  between  related  algorithms.  The  algorithm by
Rieger and Kawashima is that for each site one generates new cuts in addition
to  the  old  ones from the  already existing  segments  via a  Poisson process  with
decay time 1/γ    along the imaginary-time direction[15].  This algorithm directly
detects the correlation length along the imaginary-time direction.  On the other
hand, this algorithm directly treats the number of cuts for detecting the corre-
lation lengths along the imaginary-time direction.  This algorithm generates the
number of cuts  for each site, and this  algorithm adds the cuts  randomly.  The
algorithm  by  Morita,  Suzuki  and  Nakamura  is  that  the  initial  cluster  state  is
made by giving the position of cuts by the Poisson process with the mean value
βγ  [16].  If the number of generated domain walls is odd, one of the domain walls
is removed to obey the periodic boundary conditions along the imaginary-time
direction[16].  This algorithm does not judge whether the number of generated
domain  walls  is  odd  or  even.   If  this  process  for  removing  one  of  the  domain
walls  was  combined  with  this  algorithm,  this  combined  algorithm  gives  incor-
rect results.  Therefore, this algorithm and the algorithm by Morita, Suzuki and
Nakamura should be considered to be separated.
    The simulation results by these algorithms can be the same for all situations.
The orders of calculation costs for this algorithm and the related algorithms can
also be  the  same for the  system sizes, thus  we  do not compare the  algorithms
in  detail  in  this  article.   The  aim  of  this  article  is  to  propose  a  new  quantum
annealing schedule and to investigate the eﬃciency of the schedule.   The mathe-
matical form of this Monte Carlo algorithm is directly related to the derivation
of a smallest eﬀective transverse ﬁeld, and the schedule that we pr opose in this
article utilizes the ﬁeld.  We derive the ﬁeld in§6.


                                                   9
5    Quantities

We describe the quantities that we investigate in this article.
    By  using  Eq.  (10),  the  expectation  value  [⟨E⟩T ]J  of  the  energy  E  of  the
HamiltonianH(t) (Eq. (6)) is written as

            [⟨E⟩T ]J  =−  ∂∂β [log Z]J
            [ 1           ∑    (           ∑     ∑                        ∑    ∑     1−σ zikσ zil)
       =      Z   lim             − J(t)M             τijσ zikσ zjk−  1β                  2
                  ∆  ˜t→0{σ z              k∈ρ  ij∈ρ                      kl∈ρ  i∈ρ
                            ik}
                   [                ∑                                           ∑    1−σ zikσ zil ]]
           × exp    J(t)∆ ˜t ∑           τijσ zikσ zjk + log(γ(t)∆ ˜t) ∑                  2
                              k∈ρ  ij∈ρ                                   kl∈ρ  i∈ρ                  J ,
                                                                                                       (24)

where⟨⟩T  is  the  thermal  average,  and  [ ]J  is  the  average  for  τij.   [ ]J  is  the
average for the problems that are asked to solve, and, if the word for the  spin
glass model is used, [ ]J  is the random conﬁguration average.  Therefore, in order
to calculate the expectation value of the energy by the Monte Carlo simulation,
                                   ∑     ∫   β                             N∑
                  E =− J(t)β                                           β       nkink(i)                 (25)
                                  <ij>     0  d˜t τijσ zi (˜t)σ zj (˜t)−  1i=1

is  sampled,  where  nkink(i)  is  the  number  of  kinks  at  site  i.   By  the  way,  the
solution of a given optimization problem at site i can be obtained as
                                                     ∫ β
                                      Sresulti        =⏐⏐∫ β0 d˜t σ zi (˜t)

                                                       0 d˜t σ zi (˜t)⏐⏐ .                                           (26)
The aim of the quantum annealing is to solve optimization problems.  Therefore,
by using Eqs.(2) and (26), investigating an energy EP  given by
                                                 ∫ β               ∫ β
                         EP  =−  ∑         τij  ⏐⏐∫ β0 d˜t σ zi (˜t)⏐⏐∫ β0 d˜t σ zj (˜t)

                                     <ij>          0 d˜t σ zi (˜t)⏐⏐ 0 d˜t σ zj (˜t)⏐⏐                         (27)

can be suited for this study, since, if a lot of kinks remains in the system after
annealing,  there  is  a  possibility  that  E  of  Eq.  (25)  gives  an  unexpected  low
value.  In addition, there is a possibility that this unexpected low value gives a
false impression for success of the quantum annealing.  Thus we investigate the
energy EP  instead of the energy E  in this article.
    We deﬁne the exact ground-state energy of Eq. (2) as  EG, where the exact
ground-state  is  the  exact  solution  of  the  given  problem.   EG  depends  on  τij.
The residual energy Eres is given by

                                      Eres = [⟨EP⟩T− EG]J .                                           (28)


                                                     10
We investigate the residual energy Eres  in this article.
    The accuracy Pexact is given by

                                      Pexact = [⟨δEP ,E  G⟩T ]J .                                           (29)

We investigate the accuracy Pexact in this article.

6    A  new  quantum  annealing  schedule

The mathematical form of this Monte Carlo algorithm derived in§3 is directly
related to the derivation of a smallest eﬀective transverse ﬁeld, an d the quantum
annealing schedule that we propose in this article utilizes the ﬁeld.  Firstly, we
derive the ﬁeld based on a discussion of percolation of spin correlation per spin
along the continuous-imaginary-time direction.
    By cuts used in Eqs.(19) - (21), spin correlations are cut along the imaginary-
time  direction.   We  consider  the  fewest  number  of  cuts  per  spin.   Since  the
imaginary-time  direction  has  periodic  boundary  conditions,  by  considering  a
percolation of spin correlations, the fewest number of cuts per spin, nfewest cut,
is obtained as two,
                                            nfewest cut = 2 .                                                  (30)
By  using  Eqs.  (22)  and  (30),  the  fewest  number  of  cuts  per  spin  for  parallel
spins along the imaginary-time direction, nfewest add, is obtained as

                                      nfewest add + nkink = 2 .                                           (31)

By using Eq.(20),  the average number of cuts  per spin for parallel spins along
the imaginary-time direction is obtained as

                                     ∞∑
                                           naddP (nadd) = γ(t)β .                                       (32)
                                  nadd=0

Therefore, when there is  no kink  (nkink  = 0),  by  using  Eqs. (31)  and (32),  we
obtain a smallest eﬀective transverse ﬁeld  γS  as

                                                γS =  2β  .                                                       (33)

When there are kinks, by using Eq. (31), nfewest add  is obtained as

                                            nfewest add < 2 ,                                                  (34)

since nkink > 0.  Therefore, when there are kinks, a smallest eﬀective transverse
ﬁeld ˜γS  is obtained as
                                                ˜γS < γS .                                                       (35)
If there is no kink, the transverse ﬁeld γ for γ < γS is not eﬀective for generating
quantum eﬀect.  γ for γ = γS is eﬀective for generating quantum eﬀect regardless


                                                    11
of the number of kinks.  A smallest eﬀect transverse ﬁeld that does  not depend
on the number of kinks is desired in this study.  Therefore, we estimate that γS
is the smallest eﬀective ﬁeld that should be used in this study.
    We propose a QA schedule for studying transverse-ﬁeld-based quantum ver-
sus classical annealing of the Ising model by utilizing the ﬁeld  γS  as
                                         (           )            (           )
                       γ(t) = γS HE        θ−   tTI     =  2β HE    θ−   tTI    ,                         (36)

where HE(x) is the Heaviside step function, using the half-maximum convention,
which gives 1 if x > 0, gives 0. 5 if x = 0, and gives 0 if x < 0.  θ is an adjusting
value  for  0≤  θ  <  1.   The  value  θ  is  set  to  0. 5  for  example.   Here,  in  this
study, t is the Monte Carlo time, and TI  is the ending Monte Carlo time.  The
present  QA  schedule  is  made  for  the  comparison between  the  system  with  no
transverse ﬁeld and the system with the smallest eﬀective transve rse ﬁeld.  The
inverse temperature β  is set to a low but ﬁnite temperature.  For J(t) in Eq. (1),
using J(t) = t/T   I  for 0≤ t≤ TI  may be the simplest form as used in Ref. [7].
Therefore, we investigate
                                    ∑                          (             )       N∑
                 H1(t) =−  tTI            τijσ zi σ zj−  2β HE   0. 5−   tTI        σ xi                 (37)
                                   <ij>                                         i=1

as  the  present-quantum-annealing  schedule  in  this  article.   The  Hamiltonian
H2(t) for a conventional-quantum-annealing schedule is given by [7]
                                        ∑                   (          )       N∑
                     H2(t) =−  tTI            τijσ zi σ zj−   1−   tTI         σ xi  .                      (38)
                                        <ij>                              i=1

We also investigateH2(t) as a conventional-quantum-annealing schedule in this
article for comparison.  As a classical-annealing schedule, we investigate
                                                      ∑
                                   H3(t) =−  tTI            τijσ zi σ zj                                        (39)
                                                     <ij>

in this article for comparison.  As for calculating annealing processes, this clas-
sical annealing schedule is  mathematically the same with a classical annealing
for J = 1, β(t) = βt/T   I  and γ = 0 in Eq. (6), thus we investigateH3(t).
    In  Refs.  [3,  11],  an  another  quantum-annealing  schedule  has  also  been  ap-
plied.  This QA schedule is that the transverse ﬁeld γ(t) is initially much larger
than the couplings, γ(0)≫ J(0)|τij|, J(t) is a constant for t, and, during QA,
γ(t)  is  slowly  reduced  to  zero.   For  this  annealing  schedule,  it  is  reported  in
Ref.  [11]  that  Monte  Carlo  simulations  for  the  Ising  spin  glass  model  on  the
square lattice in the physically relevant continuous-imaginary-time limit do not
show  superiority  of  QA  against  CA.  We  do  not  investigate  this  schedule  in
this  article  because  the  results  are  already  shown  in  Ref.  [11].   This  schedule
is  the  conventional  schedule  of  the  quantum  annealing,  and  the  schedule  of


                                                   12
H2(t) is the conventional schedule used in a quantum computation by adiabatic
evolution[7, 8].  The schedule ofH2(t) has not been tested in the framework of
the quantum annealing, thus we investigate the schedule ofH2(t) in this article
    A method using a pulse of the transverse ﬁeld is also proposed in Ref.  [16],
however the annealing schedule for this method is unclear in Ref. [16].  Thus we
do not compare the present annealing schedule with this method in this article.
    We investigate the eﬀectivities forH1(t),H2(t) andH3(t) in this article.
    In this study, the exchange interaction is tuned instead of the temperature.
Even if  the  temperature  is  tuned,  the  temperature  is  tuned  from  inﬁnity  to  a
low temperature  since  our  aim  is  to  simulate  real-physical systems.  It  can  be
considered  that  the  temperature  does  not  reach  absolute  zero  in  real-physical
systems.  It can be  reasonable that the ﬁnal temperature of annealing is a low
temperature.   In  this  study,  the  exchange  interaction  changes  instead  of  the
temperature,  thus,  if  the  transverse  ﬁeld  is  imposed,  the  annealing  becomes
QA, and, if the transverse ﬁeld is not imposed, the annealing becomes CA.
    By using Eqs. (22) and (32) on condition of no kink and a ﬁxed number  for
adding cuts, the transverse ﬁeld is quantized as

                                γQ(n) =  nβ  ,     n  = 2,  3,  4, . . . ,                                          (40)

in  the  Ising  model  for  generating  quantum  eﬀect.   Even  if  a  transverse  ﬁeld
γQ(n)  is  imposed,  the  quantum eﬀect  increases with  increasing the  number  of
kinks.   However,  to  know  that  the  transverse ﬁeld  is  quantized  as  in  Eq.  (40)
can be convenient for adjustment of the quantum eﬀect.   γQ(2) is the smallest
eﬀective ﬁeld used in this study ( γQ(2) = γS).  If a transverse ﬁeld γQ for n = 3
is  imposed,  the  generation of quantum eﬀect  for  n = 3  is  guaranteed at least.
When a  transverse ﬁeld  γex  is  imposed for example,  the quantum number  nex
is  obtained  as  nex  =  βγex.   If  nex  <  2,  γex  is  estimated  as  no  eﬀective  for
generating  quantum  eﬀect.   If  nex ≥  2,  the  generation  of  quantum  eﬀect  for
nex  is  guaranteed at  least.  Since  very large  n  disorders spin  orders too  much,
searching  proper  n  for  time  t  is,  of  course,  required  for  good  performance  of
optimization.  This quantization is a quantization for the number of cutting spin
correlation per spin along the continuous-imaginary-time direction.  Because the
quantum  eﬀect  by  the  transverse ﬁeld  depends  on  the  number  of  t he  cuts  for
the correlation lengths along the continuous-imaginary-time direction, we focus
on this quantization, and we utilize the fewest quantum number in this article.

7    Simulation  results

We ﬁrstly tested our program source code for the two-spin-model case in order
to ﬁx software bugs, because static properties in the two-spin model are exactly
calculated.  We secondly tested our program source code for the one-dimensional
ferromagnetic  Ising  spin  chain  with  periodic  boundary  conditions  under  the
transverse ﬁeld (τij  = 1 and γ(t) = γ) in order to ﬁx software bugs.  The critical
properties at TE = 0 are identical to those of the classical two-dimensional Ising


                                                  13
        0.05

        0.04                                                   Classical
  Eres                                                         Conventional
                                                               Present
        0.03


        0.02

        0.01         200             400     600  8001000           2000
                                                  TI



Figure 3:   The relation between the ending Monte Carlo time TI and the residual
energy Eres.  The results of the±J  Ising spin glass model on the square lattice
are shown.  The  number  of  spins,  N,  is  100,  and the  inverse temperature  β  is
10.  The  solid square represents the result for  the classical-annealing schedule,
the  solid  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  conventional-quantum-annealing
schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  present-quantum-
annealing schedule.


model  and  are  well  known  exactly  (the  critical  exponents  are  γC  =  1,  ν  =  1,
β  = 1/  8 and z = 1) [23].  We conﬁrmed the values of the critical exponents ν and
β  by  using this  algorithm and the  ﬁnite-size-scaling method.  We  do  not show
the  results  of the  two-spin-model case  and the  one-dimensional-ferromagnetic-
Ising-spin-chain case, because the simulations were performed for ﬁxing software
bugs.  Software bugs are ﬁxed as above.
    Next,  we  performed  simulations  for  the±J  Ising  spin  glass  model  on  the
square  lattice  with  periodic  boundary  conditions.   For  each  system  size  and
each  ending  Monte  Carlo  time,  100  realizations  of  τij  were  investigated.   For
each realization,  10  simulations  were  performed.  Thus,  1000  simulations  were
performed for each system size and each ending Monte Carlo time.  100 Monte
Carlo steps  were  used  for  preparing  the  initial  states  at  each simulation.  The
inverse temperature β  was set to β  = 10.  The CA schedule, the conventional-
quantum-annealing (CQA) schedule and the present-quantum-annealing (PQA)
schedule were performed.  All the instances used for CA, CQA and PQA are the
same.
    Fig. 3 shows the relation between the ending Monte Carlo time TI  and the
residual  energy  Eres  given  in  Eq.  (28).   The  number  of  spins,  N,  is  100.   The


                                                14
            0.7

            0.6
  Pexact
            0.5

            0.4                                                  Classical
                                                                 Conventional
            0.3                                                  Present

                       200             400     600  8001000           2000
                                                    TI



Figure  4:      The  relation  between  the  ending  Monte  Carlo  time  TI  and  the
accuracy  Pexact.   The  results  of  the±J  Ising  spin  glass  model  on  the  square
lattice are shown.  The number of spins, N, is 100, and the inverse temperature β
is 10.  The solid square represents the result for the classical-annealing schedule,
the  solid  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  conventional-quantum-annealing
schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  present-quantum-
annealing schedule.


solid square represents the result for the CA schedule, the solid circle represents
the  result  for  the  CQA  schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for
the PQA schedule.  At TI  = 200, the result of CA is better than the results of
CQA and PQA. At TI  = 1600, the results of CQA and PQA are better than the
result of CA. Therefore, by fast annealing, CA is seen to outperform QA, but,
by  slow annealing, QA is  seen to  outperform CA.  At TI  = 200 and TI  = 400,
the results of PQA are better than the results of CQA.
    Fig. 4 shows the relation between the ending Monte Carlo time TI  and the
accuracy Pexact  given in  Eq.  (29).  The  number  of  spins,  N,  is  100.  The  solid
square represents the result for the CA schedule, the solid circle represents the
result  for  the  CQA  schedule,  and  the  open  circle represents  the  result  for  the
PQA schedule.  At TI  = 200, the result of CA is better than the results of CQA
and  PQA.  At  TI  =  1600,  the  results  of  CQA  and  PQA  are  better  than  the
result of CA. Therefore, by fast annealing, CA is seen to outperform QA, but,
by slow annealing, QA is seen to outperform CA. At TI  = 400 and TI  = 1600,
the results of PQA are better than the results of CQA.
    From  Figs.  3  and  4,  by  fast  annealing,  CA  is  seen  to  outperform  QA  at  a
number of spins, but,  by  slow annealing, QA is seen to outperform CA at the


                                                15
        0.025               Classical

          0.02              Conventional
        0.015               Present
 Eres     0.01

        0.005
               0
                10              20              40       60    80 100
                                                    N


Figure 5:   The relation between the number of spins, N, and the residual energy
Eres.   The  results  of  the±J  Ising  spin  glass  model  on  the  square  lattice  are
shown.  The ending Monte Carlo time TI  is 1600, and the inverse temperature β
is 10.  The solid square represents the result for the classical-annealing schedule,
the  solid  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  conventional-quantum-annealing
schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  present-quantum-
annealing schedule.


number of spins.  From Figs. 3 and 4, PQA is seen to outperform CQA.
    Fig. 5 shows the relation between the number of spins, N, and the residual
energy Eres  given in  Eq. (28).  The  ending  Monte  Carlo  time  TI  is  1600.  The
solid square represents the result for the CA schedule, the solid circle represents
the  result  for  the  CQA  schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for
the  PQA schedule.  At  N  = 100, the  result of QA  is  better  than  the  result of
CA. QA is seen to outperform CA at large system sizes.  At N  = 36, the result
of PQA is better than the result of CQA. We can see that the results of CQA
and PQA are better than the result of CA for N  dependence.  This  shows the
superiority of QA against CA. We could not see the superiority of PQA against
CQA for N  dependence.
    Fig. 6 shows the relation between the number of spins, N, and the accuracy
Pexact  given  in  Eq.  (29).  The  ending  Monte  Carlo time  TI  is  1600.  The  solid
square represents the result for the CA schedule, the solid circle represents the
result  for  the  CQA  schedule,  and  the  open  circle represents  the  result  for  the
PQA schedule.  At N  = 100, the result of QA is better than the result of CA.
QA is seen to outperform CA at large system sizes.  At N  = 36 and N  = 100,
the  results  of  PQA  are  better  than  the  results  of  CQA.  We  can  see  that  the


                                                16
                1
             0.9
             0.8
 Pexact      0.7               Classical

             0.6               Conventional
             0.5               Present

             0.410              20              40       60    80 100
                                                    N


Figure  6:     The  relation  between  the  number  of  spins,  N,  and  the  accuracy
Pexact.  The  results  of  the±J  Ising  spin  glass  model  on the  square lattice  are
shown.  The ending Monte Carlo time TI  is 1600, and the inverse temperature β
is 10.  The solid square represents the result for the classical-annealing schedule,
the  solid  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  conventional-quantum-annealing
schedule,  and  the  open  circle  represents  the  result  for  the  present-quantum-
annealing schedule.


results of CQA and PQA are better  than the  result of CA  for  N  dependence.
This shows the superiority of QA against CA. We could not see the superiority
of PQA against CQA for N  dependence.
    From  Figs.  5  and  6,  QA  is  seen  to  outperform  CA  for  the  dependences  of
the number of spins.  From Figs. 5 and 6, PQA is seen to outperform CQA.

8    Concluding remarks

We performed Monte Carlo simulations for the spin glass model on the square
lattice.  As the simulation results, QA was seen to outperform CA at a number of
spins when the annealing time was suﬃciently spent.  As the simulation r esults,
QA  was  seen  to  outperform  CA  for  the  dependences  of  the  number  of  spins
when  the  annealing  time  was  suﬃciently  spent.   Therefore,  our  conc lusion  is
that there is a superiority of QA against CA for the spin glass model by using
Monte Carlo simulations.
    QA was seen to outperform CA for the system-size dependences.  However,
we were not able to numerically estimate whether the dependences are power de-
pendences or exponential dependences, because the dependences were not clear


                                               17
enough.   Although  the  numerical  estimations  for  the  system-size  dependences
would be hard tasks, the estimations are tasks for the future.
    Conventionally,  operating  the  temperature  TE  with  a  ﬁxed  J(t)(=  J)  and
no  γ(t)  term  of  Eq.  (1)  is  called  CA,  however,  in  this  article,  we  called  that
operating  J(t)  with  a  ﬁxed  TE  and  no  γ(t)  term  of  Eq.  (1)  is  CA.  There  are
two reasons.  One is  that, as for calculating annealing processes, operating TE
with a ﬁxed J  and no γ(t) term is mathematically the same with operating J(t)
with a ﬁxed  TE  and no γ(t) term.  One is that operating J(t) with a ﬁxed  TE
and  no  γ(t)  term  is  more  practical in  relation  to  the  D-Wave  chip[10].  These
may be trivial, but we consider that these are also signiﬁcant for understanding
quantum annealing computing.
    In  this  article,  results  at  a  low  temperature  are  only  shown.   There  is  a
problem of whether  a temperature, that  changes the superiority QA over CA,
exists  or  not.    However,  investigating  each  optimized  temperatures  for  each
annealings can be more important.  These are tasks for the future
    The size of the transverse ﬁeld used in the conventional QA schedule is larger
than the size of that used in the present QA schedule, however, as the simula-
tion results, the present QA schedule was more eﬀective than the conventional
QA  schedule.   The  reason  may  be  that  the  relaxation  time  for  disorders  by
large transverse ﬁeld is required, although the tunneling eﬀect by t he transverse
ﬁeld  helps  to  make  the  systems  escape  from  local  minima  of  the  free  energy.
Therefore, this means that a thorough investigation for setting of QA schedule
is needed.  This can be an important task for the future.
    Very recently, it is reported in Ref. [24] that, by fast annealing, QA is seen
to outperform CA for their benchmark spin-glass problems.  On the other hand,
our  results  showed  that,  by  slow annealing,  QA  is  seen  to  outperform  CA  for
our benchmark spin-glass problems.  Since the used annealing schedules and the
used models are diﬀerent, we can not say anything for the diﬀerenc es between
the  results,  but  they  have  also  proposed  a  way  of  comparing  QA  with  CA.
Their schedule uses observables, on the other hand, our schedule uses a smallest
eﬀective ﬁeld.  Their schedule can be a better schedule, however th eir schedule
depends on models.  On the other hand, our schedule does not depend on models.
For this diﬀerence between the QA schedules, we believe that the present study
is also signiﬁcant.  The detailed comparison is a task for the future.
    Other QA schedules using the smallest eﬀective ﬁeld derived in this  art icle
may also be worth considering.  The present QA schedule is made based on the
concept of perturbation theory.  Other QA schedules using the smallest eﬀective
ﬁeld  based  on  the  same  concept  can  also  be  considered,  and  some  schedules
among them may be better for performance of optimization.
    A set of the computer program source codes, used in this study, is available
on payment basis [25].








                                                 18
Acknowledgments

The spin glass server [26] was used to obtain the ground-state energies for real-
izations.  We thank the persons concerned with the spin glass server.

References

  [1]  P. Ray, B. K. Chakrabarti and A. Chakrabarti, Phys.  Rev. B   39 (1989)
       11828.

  [2]  A. B. Finnila, M. A. Gomez, C. Sebenik, C. Stenson and J. D. Doll, Chem.
       Phys. Lett.   219 (1994) 343.

  [3]  T. Kadowaki and H. Nishimori, Phys.  Rev. E   58 (1998) 5355.
  [4]  G. Santoro and E. Tosatti, J. Phys.  A: Math. Gen.   39 (2006) R393.

  [5]  A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti, Rev. Mod. Phys.   80 (2008) 1061.

  [6]  S.  Tanaka,  R.  Tamura  and  B.  K.  Chakrabarti,  Quantum  Spin  Glasses,
       Annealing and Computation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and
       Delhi, 2017).

  [7]  E.      Farhi,       J.      Goldstone,       S.      Gutmann      and      M.      Sipser,
       arXiv:quant-ph/0001106.

  [8]  E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, S. Gutmann, J. Lapan, A. Lundgren and D. Preda,
       Science  292 (2001) 472.

  [9]  S.  Geman  and  D.  Geman,  IEEE  Trans.  Pattern  Anal.  Mach.  Intell.  6
       (1984) 721.

 [10]  M. W. Johnson, M. H. S. Amin, S. Gildert, T. Lanting, F. Hamze, N. Dick-
       son,  R.  Harris,  A.  J.  Berkley,  J.  Johansson,  P.  Bunyk,  E.  M.  Chapple,
       C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, K. Karimi, E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, T. Oh,
       I.  Perminov,  C.  Rich,  M.  C.  Thom,  E.  Tolkacheva,  C.  J.  S.  Truncik,
       S. Uchaikin, J. Wang, B. Wilso and G. Rose, Nature  473 (2011) 194.

 [11]  B. Heim, T. F. Rønnow, S. V. Isakov and M. Troyer, Science  348 (2015)
       215.
 [12]  A. T. Ogielski, Phys. Rev. B   32 (1985) 7384.

 [13]  B. Derrida, Phys. Rep.   184 (1989) 207.

 [14]  T. Nakamura and Y. Ito, J. Phys.  Soc. Jpn.   72 (2003) 2405.

 [15]  H. Rieger and N. Kawashima, Euro. Phys. J. B   9 (1999) 233.

 [16]  S. Morita, S. Suzuki and T. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. E   79 (2009) 065701.


                                                19
[17]  S. F. Edwards and P. W. Anderson, J. Phys. F   5 (1975) 965.

[18]  M. M´ezard, G. Parisi and M. A. Virasoro, Spin Glass Theory and Beyond
     (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1987).

[19]  H.  Nishimori,  Statistical  Physics  of  Spin  Glasses  and  Information  Pro-
     cessing:  An Introduction (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2001).

[20]  N. Kawashima and H. Rieger, Recent progress in spin glasses, in Frustrated
     Spin Systems, ed. H. T. Diep (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2004).

[21]  M. Suzuki, Prog. Theor.  Phys.   56 (1976) 1454.

[22]  N. Kawashima and J. E. Gubernatis, Phys. Rev. E   51 (1995) 1547.

[23]  B. M. McCoy and T. T. Wu, The  two-dimensional  Ising  model (Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1973).

[24]  D.  Herr,  E.  Brown,  B.  Heim,  M.  K¨onz,  G.  Mazzola  and  M.  Troyer,
     arXiv:1705.00420.

[25]  http://www.to-qc.com/services/.

[26]  http://www.informatik.uni-koeln.de/spinglass/.
































                                              20