Deep autoregressive models for the eﬃcient variational
simulation of many-body quantum systems
Or Sharir, 1,∗ Yoav Levine,1,† Noam Wies, 1,‡ Giuseppe Carleo, 2,§ and Amnon Shashua 1,¶
1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 9190401, Israel
2Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks were recently shown to be an eﬃcient representation of highly-entangled
many-body quantum states. In practical applications, neural-network states inherit numerical
schemes used in Variational Monte Carlo, most notably the use of Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo
(MCMC) sampling to estimate quantum expectations. The local stochastic sampling in MCMC
caps the potential advantages of neural networks in two ways: (i) Its intrinsic computational cost
sets stringent practical limits on the width and depth of the networks, and therefore limits their
expressive capacity; (ii) Its diﬃculty in generating precise and uncorrelated samples can result in
estimations of observables that are very far from their true value. Inspired by the state-of-the-art
generative models used in machine learning, we propose a specialized Neural Network architecture
that supports eﬃcient and exact sampling, completely circumventing the need for Markov Chain
sampling. We demonstrate our approach for two-dimensional interacting spin models, showcas-
ing the ability to obtain accurate results on larger system sizes than those currently accessible to
neural-network quantum states.
Introduction.– The theoretical understanding and
modeling of interacting many-body quantum matter rep-
resents an outstanding challenge since the early days of
quantum mechanics. At the heart of several problems in
condensed matter, chemistry, nuclear matter, and more
lies the intrinsic diﬃculty of fully representing the many-
body wave-function, in principle needed to exactly solve
Schrodinger’s equation. These mainly fall into two cat-
egories: on one hand, there are states traditionally used
in stochastic Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) calcula-
tions [1]. Chief example are Jastrow wave-functions [2],
carrying high entanglement, but also with a limited varia-
tional freedom. On the other hand, more recently, tensor-
network approaches have been put forward, based on
non-stochastic variational optimization, and most chieﬂy
on entanglement-limited variational wave-functions [3–6].
In an attempt to circumvent the limitations of the ap-
proaches above, architectures based on Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANN) were proposed as variational wave func-
tions [7]. Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM), which
represent relatively veteran machine learning constructs,
were shown to be capable of representing volume-law en-
tanglement scaling in 2D [8–11]. Recently, other neural-
network architectures have been explored. Most notably,
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) – leading deep
learning architectures that stand at the forefront of em-
pirical successes in various Artiﬁcial Intelligence domains
– have been applied to both bosonic [12] and frustrated
spin systems [13].
Despite the provable theoretical advantage of ConvNet
architectures [14], however, early numerical studies have
∗ or.sharir@cs.huji.ac.il
† yoavlevine@cs.huji.ac.il
‡ noam.wies@cs.huji.ac.il
§ gcarleo@ﬂatironinstitute.org
¶ shashua@cs.huji.ac.il
been limited to relatively shallow architectures, far from
the very deep networks used in modern machine learn-
ing applications. This practical limitation is mostly due
to two main factors. First, it is computationally expen-
sive to obtain quantum expectation values over ConvNet
states using stochastic sampling based on Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC), as is it is customary in VMC
applications. Second, there is an intrinsic optimization
bottleneck to be faced when dealing with a large number
of parameters. However, both limitations are routinely
faced when learning deep autoregressive-models, recently
introduced machine-learning techniques that have en-
abled previously intractable applications.
In this paper, we propose a pivotal shift in the use of
Neural-network Quantum States (NQS) for many-body
quantum systems, that markedly sets a discontinuity
with traditionally adopted VMC methods. Inspired by
the latest advances in generative machine learning mod-
els, we introduce variational states for which both the
sampling and the optimization issues are substantially
alleviated. Our model is composed of a ConvNet that
allows direct, eﬃcient, and i.i.d. sampling from the
highly entangled wave function it represents. The net-
work architecture draws upon successful autoregressive
models for representing and sampling from probability
distributions. Those are widely employed in the machine
learning literature [15], and have been recently used for
statistical mechanics applications [16], as well as den-
sity matrix reconstructions from experimental quantum
systems [17]. We generalize these autoregressive models
to treat complex-valued wave-functions, obtaining highly
expressive architectures parametrizing an automatically
normalized many-body quantum wave-function.
Neural Autoregressive Quantum States.– We consider
in the following a pure quantum system, constituted by
N discrete degrees of freedom s≡(s1,...,s N) (e.g. spins,
occupation numbers, etc.) such that the wave-function
amplitudes Ψ(s) fully specify its state. Here we follow
arXiv:1902.04057v3  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  19 Jan 2020
2
the approach introduced in [7], and represent ln(Ψ( s))
as a feed-forward ANN, parametrized by a possibly large
number of network connections. Given an arbitrary set
of quantum numbers,s, the output value computation of
the corresponding NQS, known as its forward pass, can
generally be described as a sequence of K matrix-vector
multiplications separated by the applications of a non-
linear element-wise activation function σ:C→C. More
formally, the unnormalized log amplitudes are given by
ln(Ψ(s)) =WKσ (Wk−1σ (··· σ (W1s))), (1)
whereW≡{Wi∈Cri×ri−1}K
i=1,r0=N,r K=1,r 1,...,r K−1
are known as the widths of the network, and K as the
depth. In practice, specialized variants of eq. 1 are com-
monly used, e.g. early applications have focused on shal-
low architectures ( k=1) such as Restricted Boltzmann
Machines, for which the activation function is typically
taken to be σ(z)= ln cosh(z). Other, deeper, choices are
often advantageous, such as convolutional networks, in
which most of the matrices are restricted to act on a
subset of the quantum numbers, computing convolutions
with small ﬁlters.
Given a NQS representation of a many-body quan-
tum state, estimating physical observables ⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩
of a local operator O, is in general analytically in-
tractable, but can be realized numerically through a
stochastic procedure, as done in VMC. Speciﬁcally,
⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩=⟨Oloc⟩P, where ⟨...⟩P denote statistical ex-
pectation values over the Born probability density
P(s)≡| Ψ(s)|2, and Oloc≡∑
s′⟨s|O|s′⟩Ψ(s′)/Ψ(s) is the
corresponding statistical estimator. In the vast majority
of VMC applications, including NQS so-far, a MCMC al-
gorithm is typically used to generate samples from P(s).
While MCMC is a rather ﬂexible technique, it comes with
a large computational cost, especially for deep ANNs.
Additionally, though MCMC asymptotically generates
samples that are correctly distributed, in practice it can
be plagued by very large autocorrelation times, and lack
of ergodicity, that can severely aﬀect the quality of the
samples being generated.
In light of these limitations, we propose here a
specialized network architecture that instead supports
eﬃcient and exact sampling. Our approach is an
extension of Neural Autoregressive Density Estima-
tors (NADE) [15] to quantum applications, result-
ing in what we dub Neural Autoregressive Quantum
States (NAQS). To start with, ﬁrst consider the task
of representing a probability distribution with NADE
models. These models build on the so-called autore-
gressive property, which entails a decomposition of the
full probability distribution as a product of condition-
als, i.e. P (s1,...,s N)=∏N
i=1pi(si|si−1,...,s 1). The
power of these models comes from the observation that,
for every i, the conditional probabilities pi can be
individually represented as an ANN receiving as in-
put the variables s1,...,s i−1 and outputting a vector
vi≡(vi,s1,v i,s2,...,v i,sM ) representing the unnormalized
probabilities for si to take one of the M possible dis-
crete values sj, conditioned on given s1,...,s i−1. It is
crucial that each output vector vi does not depend on
the value of si or any of the variables appearing with
a larger index, si+1,...,s N, for a pre-chosen ordering.
To ensure that each network outputs a valid conditional
distribution, it is then suﬃcient to take the exponent
of each entry and normalizing it according to the l1
norm, i.e. pi(si|si−1,...,s 1)=exp(vi,si)/∑
s′|exp(vi,s′)|,
also known as a Softmax operation.
Even though it is possible to use N separate networks
for each of the N conditional probabilities, and each ac-
cepting a variable number of inputs, in practice it is
more common to use a single ANN that accepts N in-
puts and outputs N probability vectors. In this case,
the autoregressive property is enforced by masking the
inputs si,...,s N for the i’th output vector, i.e. ensur-
ing that the contributions of higher-ordered spins to the
output of the network vanish. PixelCNN [18] is such an
architecture, and is built as a sequence of masked convo-
lutional layers, whose ﬁlters are restricted to having zeros
at positions “ahead”. For example, in a one dimensional
system, a ﬁlter of widthR, whereR is odd, would be con-
strained to have (w1,...,w (R−1)/2, 0,..., 0), and thus the
ith output of each layer depends uniquely on the indices
at s1,...,s i−1.
A chief advantage of networks with the autoregressive
property, is that directly drawing samples according to
P (s) is conceptually straightforward. One can sample
each si in sequence, according to its given conditional
probability that depends just on the previously sampled
(s1,...,s i−1). Carefully exploiting the intrinsic sparse-
ness of the network weights, further leads to a very eﬃ-
cient algorithm for sampling [19]. Remarkably, the com-
plexity of sampling a full string s1...s N in a PixelCNN
architecture can be reduced to the complexity of just a
single forward pass.
Our NAQS model for representing wave-functions is
based on the same NADE principles so-far described.
Speciﬁcally, just as probability functions can be factor-
ized into a product of conditional probabilities, we repre-
sent a normalized wave-function as a product of normal-
ized conditional wave-functions, such that
Ψ(s1,...,s N)=
N∏
i=1
ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1), (2)
where ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1) are such that, for any ﬁxed
(s1,...,s i−1)∈{ 1,...,M }i−1, they satisfy the normal-
ization condition ∑
s′|ψi(s′|si−1,...,s 1)|2 =1. If this
condition holds, then a strong normalization condition
for the full wave-function follows (see app. A for proof):
Claim 1 Let Ψ:[M]N→C such that
Ψ(s1,...,s N)=∏N
i=1ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1), where {ψi}N
i=1
are normalized conditional wave-functions. Then, Ψ is
normalized, i.e.,∑
s1,...,sN
|Ψ(s1,...,s N)|2 =1.
3
(a) Neural Autoregressive Quantum State (b) Sampling (s1, . . . , s4)∼| Ψ(s1, . . . , s4)|2
s1
s2
s3
s4
lnΨ1
lnΨ2
lnΨ3
lnΨ4
∑
i ln Ψi(si| . . .)
Masked
ConvolutionsSpins l2-normalization
(in log-space)
Normalized
Wave-function ∼ s1
Step 1:
s1
∼ s2
Step 2:
s1
s2
∼ s3
Step 3:
s1
s2
s3
∼ s4
Step 4:
FIG. 1. Neural Autoregressive Quantum States are neural networks that represent a normalized wave-function, Ψ( s1,...,s N),
by factoring it to a sequence of normalized conditional wave-functions, denoted by Ψ i(si|si−1,...,s 1) for the i’th particle, in
a manner similar to that of Neural Autoregressive Density Estimator (see eq. 3). (a) Illustration of a deep 1D-convolutional
NAQS model following the PixelCNN [18] architecture. Each column of nodes represent a layer in the network, starting with
the input layer representing the N-particle conﬁguration (s1,...,s N). Each internal node in the graph is a complex vector
computed according to its layer type. Namely, masked convolutions are limited to having local connectivity, where a node at
the j’th row is only connected to nodes with connections to si where i<j. All inputs to a node at the l’th layer are multiplied
by a matrixW (l), shared across all rows in the same layer, and followed by applying a non-linear element-wise functionσ:C→C.
(b) Depicts the exact sampling algorithm for NAQS, where empty nodes represent unused nodes, and ﬁlled but faded nodes
represent cached results from previous steps. The quantum number of each particle is generated sequentially, by computing
its respective conditional wave-function, and sampling according to the squared magnitude. Notice that only a single row is
processed at each step, and so sampling a complete conﬁguration has the same runtime as a single forward pass.
As in the NADE case, we represent conditional wave-
function with an ANN accepting ( s1,...,s i−1) and out-
putting a complex vector vi≡(vi,s1,v i,s2,...,v i,sM )∈CM
for each of the M possible values taken by the lo-
cal quantum numbers si. To obtain a normalized
conditional wave-function, we take its exponent
and normalize it according to the l2-norm, i.e.,
ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1) = ˆvi,si≡ exp(vi,si)/
√∑
s′|exp(vi,s′)|2.
Given this parametrization, the full wave-function
log-amplitude ln Ψ(s1...s N) is easily obtained, once all
the vectors v1,..., vN have been computed, as given by:
ln Ψ(s)=
N∑
i=1
(
vi,si− 1
2 ln
∑
s′
|exp(vi,s′)|2
)
. (3)
As in the probabilistic autoregressive model, we can rep-
resent the entire NAQS by a single neural network out-
putting N complex vectors, as illustrated in Fig. 1a.
Though our proposed architecture can work with either
complex- or real-parameters, we have found that using
the latter work better, where we represent each com-
plex conditional log-amplitude using two real values, log-
magnitude and phase.
Moreover, there is a special relationship between
a NAQS and its induced Born probability, since
|Ψ(s1,...,s N)|2 =∏N
i=1|ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1)|2, implying
that |ψi(s)|2 is a valid conditional probability. Thus,
the induced Born probability of a NAQS has the ex-
act same structure of a NADE model. Speciﬁcally,
taking the squared magnitude of its output vectors,
i.e.,∀i,s′, ¯vi,s′=|ˆvi,s′|2, transform NAQS into a standard
NADE representation of this distribution, which impor-
tantly includes its eﬃcient and exact sampling method.
In contrast to standard MCMC sampling employed for
correlated wave-functions, NAQS thus allows for direct,
eﬃcient sampling with the computational complexity of
a single forward pass, as depicted in Fig. 1b.
Optimization.– The NAQS representation of many-
body wave functions can be used in practice for several
applications. These include for example ground-state
search [7], quantum-state tomography [20], dynam-
ics [7], and quantum circuits simulation [21]. Here
we more speciﬁcally focus on the task of ﬁnding
the ground state of a given Hamiltonian H. In this
context, we denote by Ψ W the wave-function rep-
resented by a NAQS of a ﬁxed architecture that is
parameterized by W, and we wish to ﬁnd W values
that minimize the energy, i.e., W∗= argminWE(W),
where E(W)≡⟨ΨW|H|ΨW⟩= Es∼|ΨW|2[Eloc(s;W)],
Eloc(s;W)≡∑
s′Hs,s′
ΨW(s′)
ΨW(s) , and H is usually a highly
sparse matrix, and so computing Eloc for a given sample
takes at most O(N) forward passes.
The common approach for solving the optimization
problem above with an NQS is to estimate the gradient of
E(W) with respect to W, and use variants of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) to ﬁnd the minimizer of E(W).
Estimating the gradient can be done by ﬁrst employing
a variant of the log-derivative trick, i.e.,
∂E
∂W = E
s∼|ΨW|2
[
2 Re
(
(Eloc(s)∗−E∗)∂ ln ΨW
∂W
)]
. (4)
Now, while we can eﬃciently compute the log deriva-
tive of ΨW, exactly computing the expected value is in-
tractable, but we can still approximate it by computing
its value over a ﬁnite batch of samples {s(i)}B
i=1. The
quality of this approximation depends on the batch size,
B, but also on the degree of correlations between the in-
dividual samples. The advantages of our direct sampling
method supported by NAQS over MCMC are twofold in
this context: (i) Faster sampling: each individual sample
can be generated with fewer network passes, and gener-
ating a batch of samples is embarrassingly parallel, as
opposed to the sequential nature of MCMC; (ii) Faster
convergence: because the generated samples are exact
4
Γ NAQS Energy QMC Energy NAQS ⟨|σz|⟩ QMC⟨|σz|⟩
2.0J -2.4096022(2) -2.40960(3) 0.78326(2) 0.78277(38)
2.5J -2.7476550(5) -2.74760(3) 0.57572(3) 0.57566(63)
3.0J -3.1739005(5) -3.17388(4) 0.16179(4) 0.16207(54)
3.5J -3.6424799(3) -3.64243(4) 0.11094(3) 0.11011(30)
4.0J -4.1217979(2) -4.12178(4) 0.09725(2) 0.09728(24)
TABLE I. Estimates of the ground state energies of the
transverse-ﬁeld Ising model for diﬀerent values of Γ on a
12×12 lattice, and the corresponding estimates of ⟨σz⟩, as
obtained by either NAQS or QMC.
Direct Sampling
MCMC 1
MCMC 2
MCMC 3
MCMC 4
FIG. 2. An illustration of the two modes of the ground
state, by taking the ﬁrst two principal components of the
generated samples. The green points correspond to our di-
rect sampling method, and the other colors represent diﬀerent
MCMC chains. The plot was generated by training a NAQS
on the transverse-ﬁeld Ising model with Γ=2J, below the crit-
ical value, on a 12×12 lattice until convergence to the ground
state, and then sampling from the trained NAQS using either
our direct sampling method, or 4 separate MCMC samplers.
and i.i.d., and so result in more accurate estimates of
the gradient at each step.
Experiments.– As a ﬁrst benchmark for our approach,
we consider a case where MCMC sampling can be
strongly biased. A paradigmatic quantum system ex-
hibiting this issue is found in the ferromagnetic phase
of the transverse ﬁeld Ising model. The Hamiltonian
for this model is given by H=−J∑
<i,j>σi
zσj
z−Γ∑
iσi
x,
where the summation runs over pairs of lattice edges.
Here we study the case of a 2D square lattice with open
boundary conditions, and for varying strengths of the
transverse ﬁeld. The system is in a ferromagnetic phase
when the transverse magnetic ﬁeld Γ is weak with re-
spect to the coupling constant, and speciﬁcally in 2D
when Γ<Γc≃3.044J [22].
In order to verify the correctness of the model proposed
in section 2, we begin by comparing the ground state en-
ergy and system magnetization obtained for a 12×12 sys-
tem with those obtained by an unbiased quantum Monte
Carlo (QMC) simulation. Using our open-source library,
FlowKet [23], we employ a NAQS model following the
PixelCNN architecture, using the ADAM [24] SGD vari-
ant with the gradient estimator of eq. 4. Additional
technical details are listed in app. B. Table I shows that
our model achieves very high accuracy for both magneti-
zation and energy densities for diﬀerent transverse ﬁeld
values across the phase diagram: when the system is in
the ferromagnetic phase, the normal phase, and near the
FIG. 3. Comparing the eﬀects of the sampling method, either
MCMC or direct sampling, on the training procedure for the
transverse-ﬁeld Ising model with Γ=3 J, close to the critical
value, on a large (21×21) lattice. When using MCMC, sam-
ples are taken every k∈{ 10, 50, 100, 300} steps in the chain,
where increasingk reduces the correlation between samples at
the expense of increased computational cost. The solid lines
shows the relative error to the minimal energy found for this
system in our experiments, and dashed lines shows the energy
variance. Since MCMC takes a considerable time to complete
just a single iteration, we have restricted the training to max-
imum of 100 hours.
phase transition.
In order to quantify the behavior of our model in a
region of broken symmetry, we consider the case of a
transverse-ﬁeld deep in the ferromagnetic region, namely
Γ=2J. The PCA visualization in Fig. 2 shows that for
this value of Γ the MCMC chains initialized at one of the
oriented states composing the ground state are stuck at
that speciﬁc orientation and cannot come around to sam-
pling spin conﬁgurations that correspond to the opposite
orientation. In contrast, spin conﬁgurations sampled di-
rectly from the distribution by using our proposed tech-
nique include equally probable conﬁgurations from both
orientations. The ergodicity breaking in local MCMC
is also directly quantiﬁable by the expectation value of
the total magnetization m≡⟨∑
iσz
i⟩, for which we ex-
pect m=0 on any ﬁnite lattice. Indeed, the i.i.d. sam-
pling enabled by our model correctly explores the two
relevant ferromagnetic states (in agreement with the vi-
sualization of Fig. 2) and reaches a value close to a total
zero magnetization, in stark contrast with MCMC esti-
mation that eﬀectively computes⟨|σz|⟩≈ 0.78 rather than
m. As expected, directly estimating ⟨|σz|⟩ with our sam-
pling method correctly recovers it to a high precision, see
Table I.
The limitation of the MCMC procedure in providing
independent samples is not only conceptually relevant,
but it can also have consequences on the quality of the re-
sulting ground-state approximations. In Fig. 3, we show
the training procedure for the transverse-ﬁeld Γ=3 J,
close to the critical value on a larger system (21 ×21).
The same NAQS architecture was trained once with the
i.i.d. sampling procedure and once with MCMC chains
of varying lengths. The optimization advantage obtained
when relying on independent samples clearly emerges
from those ﬁgures – this procedure is much quicker and
results in a signiﬁcantly more accurate ground state en-
5
Lattice PEPS NAQS QMC
10×10 -0.628601(2) -0.628627(1) -0.628656(2)
16×16 -0.643391(3) -0.643448(1) -0.643531(2)
TABLE II. Ground state energies for the antiferromagnetic
Heisenberg model with open boundary conditions, as obtained
by a state-of-the-art PEPS model [25], our NAQS model, and
the exact QMC estimation, as reported in Liu et al. [25].
ergy and lower energy variance⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2.
As a further benchmark, we also apply our method
to a more complex system, the two-dimensional an-
tiferromagnetic Heisenberg model with open bound-
ary conditions, whose Hamiltonian is given by
H=∑
⟨i,j⟩σi
xσj
x+σi
yσj
y+σi
zσj
z. We evaluate our approach
by comparing the ground state energy obtained for
10×10 and 16 ×16 systems with those obtained by
QMC simulations, as well as other variational meth-
ods. We ﬁnd that NAQS meaningfully improve upon
the accuracy of the best known variational methods for
this problem. Namely, for 10 ×10, a relative error of
8.7×10−5±0.6×10−5 was reported in Liu et al. [25] us-
ing a PEPS model, whereas with our approach we were
able to obtain 3.5×10−5±0.4×10−5. See table II for ex-
act results. While the PEPS results can be, in principle,
further improved, increasing the accuracy comes with a
very signiﬁcant computational requirements [26] due to
the unfavorable computational scaling w.r.t. the bond-
dimension. Moreover, though not directly comparable, it
is noteworthy that the relative error of the ground state
energy with periodic boundary conditions obtained by
NQS with MCMC sampling is signiﬁcantly less accurate
than ours (Carleo and Troyer [27], Choo et al. [28] report
relative error greater than 2×10−4).
Discussion.– In this work, we have shown a scheme
to facilitate the practical employment of contemporary
deep learning architectures to the modeling of many-
body quantum systems. This constitutes a striking im-
provement over currently used RBM methods that are
limited to only hundreds of parameters, and very shallow
networks. A further practical advantage we gain is the
ability to make use of the substantial body of knowledge
regarding optimization of these architectures that is accu-
mulating in the deep learning literature. We empirically
demonstrate that by employing common deep learning
optimization methods such as SGD, our direct sampling
approach allows us to train very large convolutional net-
works (20 layers, 21×21 lattice,∼1M parameters). Our
presented experiments demonstrate that even for rela-
tively simple systems MCMC sampling can fail, while the
i.i.d. sampling enabled by our model succeeds. Relying
on the theoretically promising results regarding convolu-
tional networks’ capabilities in representing highly entan-
gled systems [14], namely, systems satisfying volume-law,
we view the enabling of their optimization as an integral
step in reaching currently unattainable insight on a vast
variety of quantum many body phenomena.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by ISF Center grant 1790/12
and by the European Research Council (TheoryDL
project). Yoav Levine is supported by the Adams Fel-
lowship Program of the Israel Academy of Sciences and
Humanities. QMC simulations for the 2D Transverse-
Field Ising Model have been performed using the open-
source ALPS Library [29].
Appendix A: Proof of Claim 1
The proof follows an induction argument. For N = 1,
it holds that Ψ( s1)≡ Ψ1(s1), and so Ψ is normalized
because Ψ1 is normalized with respect to s1. Assume the
claim holds for N =k, then for N =k + 1 we ﬁrst deﬁne
˜Ψ(s1,...,s k)≡∏k
i=1 Ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1), and so
∑
s1,...,sk+1
|Ψ(s1,...,s k+1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk+1
k+1∏
i=1
|Ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk
( k∏
i=1
|Ψi(si|si−1,...,s 1)|2
) ∗=1/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright∑
sk+1
|Ψi(sk+1|sk,...,s 1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk
˜Ψ(s1,...,s k)
∗∗
= 1,
where (∗) is because Ψ k+1 is a normalized conditional
wave function, and (∗∗) because of the induction assump-
tion. □
Appendix B: T echnical Details
In this section we cover the essential technical details
of our models and how they are optimized.
1. Architecture
Our chosen architecture for our implementation of
Neural Autoregressive Quantum State is loosely inspired
by that of PixelCNN [18], which uses a row-wise order-
ing of the particles for the conditional wave-functions. All
parameters and operations in the network are real, where
the complex log-amplitudes of the conditional wave func-
tions are represented as two real numbers, as discussed in
the body. More speciﬁcally, it is composed of two inter-
acting branches: (i) a “vertical” branch for representing
conditional dependencies between a given particle and all
particles above it in the 2D lattice it resides on, and (ii) a
“horizontal” branch for representing conditional depen-
dencies between a given particle and all particles to its
6
3x3 Conv
Vertical Zero 
Padding
Down Shift Concat
Vertical and 
Horizontal 
Zero-Padding
3x3 Conv with 
zeroing at (3,3)
Vertical Branch Horizontal Branch
FIG. 4. An illustration of a single block that our architecture
is composed of.
left. Each branch comprises a sequence of convolutional
layers. The “vertical” containing convolutional layers
with 3 × 3 ﬁlters and 32 channels, where we add two
rows of zero-padding to the top lattice before applying
the convolution, to ensure a particle is not dependent
on rows below it. For the “horizontal” branch, we use
convolutional layers with 3 × 3 ﬁlters and 32 channels,
where we add two rows and two columns of zero-padding
to the top and left of the lattice before applying the con-
volution, as well as setting the parameters at the (3 , 3)
indices to be zero, all to ensure that a particle only de-
pends on particles not “ahead” of itself according to the
row-wise ordering we enforce. To combined them, the two
branches are connected using the following scheme: af-
ter every convolutional layer in the “vertical” branch, but
before the convolutional layer of the “horizontal” branch,
we take the intermediate result of the “vertical” branch,
shift every entry “down“ along the vertical axis of the
lattice, and concatenate it along the channels axis of the
horizontal branch. The ﬁnal convolutional layer of the
“horizontal” branch serves as the output of the network,
and hence we only use 2 output channels in that ﬁnal
layer, the two coordinates serving as the real and imagi-
nary parts of the log-amplitude of the conditional wave-
functions. The complete network can be depicted as a
sequence of blocks, each as illustrated in ﬁg. 4. We typ-
ically use between 10 and 40 such blocks, depending on
the speciﬁc experiment. This separation of “vertical” and
“horizontal” branches is a technique to overcome what is
known as the “blind spot” problem of the original Pixel-
CNN architecture (see van den Oord et al. [18] for more
details).
2. Handling Symmetries
While our general NAQS architecture can already rep-
resent wave-functions quite well, we have found that
leveraging the inherent symmetries of a given problem,
e.g., invariance to rotations and ﬂips, can dramatically
improve the accuracy of our model. Speciﬁcally, we use
a self-ensemble scheme to symmetrize our model, where
for a model f(s) and a given input spin-conﬁguration,
we transform it according to its symmetries, denoted by
the set T , run each of them through our model, and
aggregate the resulting log-amplitude outputs using the
following equations for our symmetrize model Sym( f):
Re(Sym(f)(s))=1
2ln
(∑
T∈T
1
|T| e2·Re(f(T s))
)
, (B1)
Im(Sym(f)(s))=Im
(
ln
(∑
T∈T
ei·Im(f(T s))
))
. (B2)
It is important to emphasize that while there are many
ways to symmetrize a model, we cannot use any aggre-
gation operation – it must also preserve its probabilistic
meaning for we to be able to sample from it eﬃciently.
We propose to incorporate the possible symmetries into
our generative model, assuming we ﬁrst sample a trans-
formationT fromT with equal probability 1/T , and then
draw a sample from our model as described in the main
text, followed by transforming it with T . This translates
to a mixture model over the squared magnitudes of the
network’s predicted amplitude, and eq. B1 realizes it in
log-space, where the real part of the output represent
the log-magnitude. For the imaginary part, we have less
restrictions and most symmetric operators would work,
but we found that the mean of circular quantities of the
phases, as expressed in eq. B2, worked best in our exper-
iments.
3. Optimization
In our experiments we employ the following general op-
timization strategy. We begin using the Adam [24] SGD
variant, using a small batch of 100 samples for estimat-
ing the gradient and using a learning rate in the order
of 10−3. After about 10K gradient update steps, we in-
crease the batch size to 1000, using the same learning
rate and optimizer as the ﬁrst stage, for an additional
10K update steps. In the ﬁnal stage of the optimiza-
tion, we increase the batch size again, and also switch to
standard SGD with a momentum term, for an additional
5K update steps. For each experiment, we test multiple
variations around the above default values of batch size,
learning rate, and number of update steps in each stage,
and report the results for the best performing models.
[1] W. L. McMillan, “Ground State of Liquid He4,” Physical
Review 138, A442–A451 (1965).
7
[2] Robert Jastrow, “Many-Body Problem with Strong
Forces,” Physical Review 98, 1479–1484 (1955).
[3] Mark Fannes, Bruno Nachtergaele, and Reinhard F
Werner, “Finitely correlated states on quantum spin
chains,” Communications in mathematical physics 144,
443–490 (1992).
[4] David Perez-Garc´ ıa, Frank Verstraete, Michael M Wolf,
and J Ignacio Cirac, “Matrix product state representa-
tions,” Quantum Information and Computation 7, 401–
430 (2007).
[5] Frank Verstraete and J Ignacio Cirac, “Renormalization
algorithms for quantum-many body systems in two and
higher dimensions,” arXiv preprint cond-mat/0407066
(2004).
[6] Guifr´ e Vidal, “Class of quantum many-body states that
can be eﬃciently simulated,” Physical review letters101,
110501 (2008).
[7] Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer, “Solving the
quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural net-
works,” Science 355, 602–606 (2017).
[8] Dong-Ling Deng, Xiaopeng Li, and S Das Sarma, “Quan-
tum entanglement in neural network states,” Physical
Review X 7, 021021 (2017).
[9] Jing Chen, Song Cheng, Haidong Xie, Lei Wang, and
Tao Xiang, “Equivalence of restricted boltzmann ma-
chines and tensor network states,” Phys. Rev. B 97,
085104 (2018).
[10] Ivan Glasser, Nicola Pancotti, Moritz August, Ivan D.
Rodriguez, and J. Ignacio Cirac, “Neural-network quan-
tum states, string-bond states, and chiral topological
states,” Phys. Rev. X 8, 011006 (2018).
[11] Raphael Kaubruegger, Lorenzo Pastori, and Jan Carl
Budich, “Chiral topological phases from artiﬁcial neural
networks,” Physical Review B 97, 195136 (2018).
[12] Hiroki Saito and Masaya Kato, “Machine Learning Tech-
nique to Find Quantum Many-Body Ground States of
Bosons on a Lattice,” Journal of the Physical Society of
Japan 87, 014001 (2017).
[13] Kenny Choo, Giuseppe Carleo, Nicolas Regnault, and
Titus Neupert, “Symmetries and Many-Body Excitations
with Neural-Network Quantum States,” Physical Review
Letters 121, 167204 (2018).
[14] Yoav Levine, Or Sharir, Nadav Cohen, and Amnon
Shashua, “Quantum entanglement in deep learning ar-
chitectures,” Physical review letters (2019).
[15] Benigno Uria, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Karol Gregor, Iain
Murray, and Hugo Larochelle, “Neural Autoregressive
Distribution Estimation,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research () 17, 1–37 (2016).
[16] Dian Wu, Lei Wang, and Pan Zhang, “Solving Statistical
Mechanics using Variational Autoregressive Networks,”
(2018).
[17] Juan Carrasquilla, Giacomo Torlai, Roger G Melko, and
Leandro Aolita, “Reconstructing quantum states with
generative models,” Nature Machine Intelligence 1, 155–
161 (2019).
[18] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espe-
holt, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, et al., “Conditional im-
age generation with pixelcnn decoders,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (2016) pp. 4790–
4798.
[19] Prajit Ramachandran, Tom Le Paine, Pooya Khorrami,
Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang,
Mark A Hasegawa-Johnson, Roy H Campbell, and
Thomas S Huang, “Fast generation for convolutional au-
toregressive models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06001
(2017).
[20] Giacomo Torlai, Guglielmo Mazzola, Juan Carrasquilla,
Matthias Troyer, Roger Melko, and Giuseppe Carleo,
“Neural-network quantum state tomography,” Nature
Physics 14, 447 (2018).
[21] Bjarni Jnsson, Bela Bauer, and Giuseppe Car-
leo, “Neural-network states for the classical simula-
tion of quantum computing,” arXiv:1808.05232 [cond-
mat, physics:physics, physics:quant-ph] (2018), arXiv:
1808.05232.
[22] Henk W. J. Blte and Youjin Deng, “Cluster Monte Carlo
simulation of the transverse Ising model,” Physical Re-
view E 66 (2002), 10.1103/PhysRevE.66.066110.
[23] FlowKet: an open-source library based on Tensorﬂow for
running Variational Monte-Carlo simulations on GPUs,
https://github.com/HUJI-Deep/FlowKet.
[24] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization,” 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2014).
[25] Wen-Yuan Liu, Shao-Jun Dong, Yong-Jian Han, Guang-
Can Guo, and Lixin He, “Gradient optimization of ﬁnite
projected entangled pair states,” Physical Review B 95,
195154 (2017).
[26] L. He, H. An, C. Yang, F. Wang, J. Chen, C. Wang,
W. Liang, S. Dong, Q. Sun, W. Han, W. Liu, Y. Han,
and W. Yao, “Peps++: Towards extreme-scale simula-
tions of strongly correlated quantum many-particle mod-
els on sunway taihulight,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems 29, 2838–2848 (2018).
[27] Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer, “Solving the
quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural net-
works,” Science 355, 602–606 (2017).
[28] Kenny Choo, Titus Neupert, and Giuseppe Carleo,
“Study of the two-dimensional frustrated j1-j2 model
with neural network quantum states,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.06713 (2019).
[29] B. Bauer, L. D. Carr, H. G. Evertz, A. Feiguin,
J. Freire, S. Fuchs, L. Gamper, J. Gukelberger, E. Gull,
S. Guertler, A Hehn, R. Igarashi, S. V. Isakov, D. Koop,
P. N. Ma, P. Mates, H. Matsuo, O. Parcollet, G. Pa-
wowski, J. D. Picon, L Pollet, E. Santos, V. W. Scarola,
U. Schollwck, C. Silva, B. Surer, S. Todo, S. Trebst,
M. Troyer, M. L. Wall, P Werner, and S. Wessel,
“The ALPS project release 2.0: open source software for
strongly correlated systems,” Journal of Statistical Me-
chanics: Theory and Experiment 2011, P05001 (2011).
Deep autoregressive models for the eﬃcient variational
simulation of many-body quantum systems – Supplementary material
Or Sharir, 1,∗ Yoav Levine,1,† Noam Wies, 1,‡ Giuseppe Carleo, 2,§ and Amnon Shashua 1,¶
1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 9190401, Israel
2Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
Appendix A: Proof of Claim ??
The proof follows an induction argument. For N = 1,
it holds that Ψ( s1)≡ Ψ1(s1), and so Ψ is normalized
because Ψ1 is normalized with respect to s1. Assume the
claim holds for N = k, then for N = k + 1 we ﬁrst deﬁne
˜Ψ(s1, . . . , sk)≡∏k
i=1 Ψi(si|si−1, . . . , s1), and so
∑
s1,...,sk+1
|Ψ(s1, . . . , sk+1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk+1
k+1∏
i=1
|Ψi(si|si−1, . . . , s1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk
( k∏
i=1
|Ψi(si|si−1, . . . , s1)|2
) ∗=1/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright∑
sk+1
|Ψi(sk+1|sk, . . . , s1)|2
=
∑
s1,...,sk
˜Ψ(s1, . . . , sk)
∗∗
= 1,
where (∗) is because Ψ k+1 is a normalized conditional
wave function, and (∗∗) because of the induction assump-
tion. □
Appendix B: T echnical Details
In this section we cover the essential technical details
of our models and how they are optimized.
1. Architecture
Our chosen architecture for our implementation of
Neural Autoregressive Quantum State is loosely inspired
by that of PixelCNN [ ? ], which uses a row-wise order-
ing of the particles for the conditional wave-functions. All
parameters and operations in the network are real, where
the complex log-amplitudes of the conditional wave func-
tions are represented as two real numbers, as discussed
in the body. More speciﬁcally, it is composed of two
∗ or.sharir@cs.huji.ac.il
† yoavlevine@cs.huji.ac.il
‡ noam.wies@cs.huji.ac.il
§ gcarleo@ﬂatironinstitute.org
¶ shashua@cs.huji.ac.il
interacting branches: (i) a “vertical” branch for repre-
senting conditional dependencies between a given parti-
cle and all particles above it in the 2D lattice it resides
on, and (ii) a “horizontal” branch for representing con-
ditional dependencies between a given particle and all
particles to its left. Each branch comprises a sequence
of convolutional layers. The “vertical” containing convo-
lutional layers with 3× 3 ﬁlters and 32 channels, where
we add two rows of zero-padding to the top lattice before
applying the convolution, to ensure a particle is not de-
pendent on rows below it. For the “horizontal” branch,
we use convolutional layers with 3×3 ﬁlters and 32 chan-
nels, where we add two rows and two columns of zero-
padding to the top and left of the lattice before apply-
ing the convolution, as well as setting the parameters at
the (3, 3) indices to be zero, all to ensure that a particle
only depends on particles not “ahead” of itself accord-
ing to the row-wise ordering we enforce. To combined
them, the two branches are connected using the follow-
ing scheme: after every convolutional layer in the “ver-
tical” branch, but before the convolutional layer of the
“horizontal” branch, we take the intermediate result of
the “vertical” branch, shift every entry “down“ along the
vertical axis of the lattice, and concatenate it along the
channels axis of the horizontal branch. The ﬁnal con-
volutional layer of the “horizontal” branch serves as the
output of the network, and hence we only use 2 output
channels in that ﬁnal layer, the two coordinates serving as
the real and imaginary parts of the log-amplitude of the
conditional wave-functions. The complete network can
be depicted as a sequence of blocks, each as illustrated in
ﬁg. 1. We typically use between 10 and 40 such blocks,
depending on the speciﬁc experiment. This separation
of “vertical” and “horizontal” branches is a technique to
overcome what is known as the “blind spot” problem of
the original PixelCNN architecture (see ? ] for more de-
tails).
2. Handling Symmetries
While our general NAQS architecture can already rep-
resent wave-functions quite well, we have found that
leveraging the inherent symmetries of a given problem,
e.g., invariance to rotations and ﬂips, can dramatically
improve the accuracy of our model. Speciﬁcally, we use
a self-ensemble scheme to symmetrize our model, where
for a model f(s) and a given input spin-conﬁguration,
we transform it according to its symmetries, denoted by
the set T , run each of them through our model, and
arXiv:1902.04057v3  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  19 Jan 2020
2
3x3 Conv
Vertical Zero 
Padding
Down Shift Concat
Vertical and 
Horizontal 
Zero-Padding
3x3 Conv with 
zeroing at (3,3)
Vertical Branch Horizontal Branch
FIG. 1. An illustration of a single block that our architecture
is composed of.
aggregate the resulting log-amplitude outputs using the
following equations for our symmetrize model Sym( f):
Re(Sym(f)(s))=1
2ln
(∑
T∈T
1
|T| e2·Re(f (T s))
)
, (B1)
Im(Sym(f)(s))=Im
(
ln
(∑
T∈T
ei·Im(f (T s))
))
. (B2)
It is important to emphasize that while there are many
ways to symmetrize a model, we cannot use any aggre-
gation operation – it must also preserve its probabilistic
meaning for we to be able to sample from it eﬃciently.
We propose to incorporate the possible symmetries into
our generative model, assuming we ﬁrst sample a trans-
formation T fromT with equal probability 1/T , and then
draw a sample from our model as described in the main
text, followed by transforming it with T . This translates
to a mixture model over the squared magnitudes of the
network’s predicted amplitude, and eq. B1 realizes it in
log-space, where the real part of the output represent
the log-magnitude. For the imaginary part, we have less
restrictions and most symmetric operators would work,
but we found that the mean of circular quantities of the
phases, as expressed in eq. B2, worked best in our exper-
iments.
3. Optimization
In our experiments we employ the following general op-
timization strategy. We begin using the Adam [ ? ] SGD
variant, using a small batch of 100 samples for estimat-
ing the gradient and using a learning rate in the order
of 10−3. After about 10K gradient update steps, we in-
crease the batch size to 1000, using the same learning
rate and optimizer as the ﬁrst stage, for an additional
10K update steps. In the ﬁnal stage of the optimiza-
tion, we increase the batch size again, and also switch to
standard SGD with a momentum term, for an additional
5K update steps. For each experiment, we test multiple
variations around the above default values of batch size,
learning rate, and number of update steps in each stage,
and report the results for the best performing models.