Predicting nucleation using machine learning in the Ising model

                                            Shan  Huang∗
                          Department  of  Physics,  Boston  University,
                              Boston,  Massachusetts  02215,  USA

                                           William  Klein†
                          Department  of  Physics,  Boston  University,
                           Boston,  Massachusetts  02215,  USA  and
                   Center  for  Computational  Science,  Boston  University,
                              Boston,  Massachusetts  02215,  USA

                                           Harvey  Gould
                          Department  of  Physics,  Boston  University,
                           Boston,  Massachusetts  02215,  USA  and
                           Department  of  Physics,  Clark  University,
                            Worcester,  Massachusetts  01610,  USA





























                                                  1
                                                    Abstract

  We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) and two logistic regression models to predict the

probability of nucleation in the two-dimensional Ising model.  The three models successfully predict
the probability for the nearest-neighbor Ising model for which classical nucleation is observed.  The

CNN outperforms the logistic regression models near the spinodal of the long-range Ising model,

but  the  accuracy  of  its  predictions  decreases  as  the  quenches  approach  the  spinodal.  Occlusion
analysis suggests that this decrease is due to the vanishing diﬀerence between the density of the

nucleating droplet and the background.  Our results are consistent with the general conclusion that

predictability decreases near a critical point.




I.    INTRODUCTION


   Many physical systems operate near or at a critical point, including earthquakes [1, 2],
electrical activities in the brain [3–5], the spread of forest ﬁres [6] and epidemics [7].  It is
well established that the predictability of local events in these systems is reduced due to
the  divergent  spatial  correlations  at  the  critical  point  [8,  9].   However,  a  recent  study  of
the predictability of the size of events in the Olami-Feder-Christensen (OFC) model [10] at
criticality [11] suggests that a divergent correlation length might not be the only reason for a
decrease of predictability. It was found ﬁnd that predictability in the OFC model decreases as
criticality is approached and that prediction is possible only for large, nonscaling events [11].
The main goal of this paper is to investigate in another context if the critical point imposes
a  limitation  on  the  success  of  machine  learning.   We  do  so  by  predicting  the  probability
of nucleation in the nearest-neighbor Ising model far from the critical point and near the
spinodal, a critical point of the mean-ﬁeld Ising model.
   Nucleation in the Ising model has been well studied.  The nucleating droplets or clusters
in classical nucleation are compact with a well deﬁned boundary between the droplet and
the  background  [13].   Classical  nucleation  has  been  tested  in  the  nearest-neighbor  Ising
model [14].  Klein et al. [12] have shown that nucleation near the spinodal critical point in
the long-range Ising model is qualitatively diﬀerent than classical nucleation.  In contrast


∗ sh2015@bu.edu

† klein@bu.edu


                                                         2
to  classical  nucleation,  the  nucleating  clusters  are  ramiﬁed  with  a  density  equal  to  the
background [15].
   Machine learning has been very successful in various prediction problems.  Hu et al. [16]
applied  principal  component  analysis,  an  unsupervised  learning  clustering  technique,  to
classify  the  disordered  and  ordered  states  and  ﬁnd  the  phase  transition  in  the  Ising  and
Blume-Capel  models.   Carrasquilla  et  al.  [17]  used  neural  networks  to  make  similar  pre-
dictions for disordered systems that do not have order parameters.  Pun et al. [11] used a
convolutional neural network (CNN) [18] to make predictions of the event sizes in the OFC
model.  It has been shown that a deep neural network can approximate arbitrarily complex
functions [19], making it a powerful tool to study the predictability of various systems.
   In this paper we apply several machine learning methods to predict the probability of
nucleation for the nearest-neighbor Ising model and for the long-range Ising model near the
spinodal  [20].   In  Sec.  II  we  discuss  the  intervention  method  for  generating  data  for  the
nucleation probability, which we use to train the machine learning models.  In Sec. III we
introduce two logistic regression models and a CNN model that we use to make predictions
of the nucleation probability.  In Sec. IV we compare the performance of these models and
show that CNN is more powerful and robust, but its predictability decreases as the system
approaches the spinodal.  In Sec. V we use occlusion analysis to identify the sensitive regions
in the input Ising conﬁgurations and ﬁnd that these regions overlap with the largest clusters
found by a percolation mapping.  These regions increase in size and becomes less deﬁned
as the system is quenched closer to the spinodal.  We associate this observation with the
emerging  symmetry  between  the  background  ﬂuctuations  and  the  nucleation  cluster  near
the spinodal.  [xx could use a stronger sentence here xx]



II.    DATA ACQUISITION

   Our  simulations  of  the  Ising  model  were  performed  using  the  Metropolis  algorithm.
We  consider  the  nearest-neighbor  Ising  model  for  which  the  critical  temperature Tc  =
2/(log(1  + √2)) and the long-range Ising model with interaction range R≥ 10 for which
Tc≈ 4.  The system is ﬁrst equilibrated at temperature T  = 4/9Tc with the magnetic ﬁeld
h pointing up.  We then ﬂip the magnetic ﬁeld to the down direction so that the system is
metastable.  The average lifetime of the metastable state is≈ 104 Monte Carlo (MC) steps


                                                       3
                                         L   10    30   50    70    100

                                        m0   0.32  0.54 0.76  0.83  0.88

 TABLE I: The values of the threshold m0 used to to estimate the nucleation time for the
   nearest-neighbor Ising model.  The value of m0 increases with L because the radius of
    gyration of the critical droplet is a decreasing fraction of the system as L increases.


per spin.  Due to thermal ﬂuctuations, clusters of down spins grow and vanish.  Eventually,
a cluster reaches the critical size at which there is a 50% probability that the cluster will
grow and ﬁll the lattice.
   Instead of identifying and monitoring the clusters during a run, which is computationally
intensive,  we  estimate  the  nucleation  time  in  our  simulations  as  the  time  that  the  mag-
netization m becomes smaller than a threshold value m0.  For the sizes of the system we
consider, the actual nucleation time is only a few MC steps per spin before this time.  For the
long-range Ising model, we choose m0 = 0.  For the nearest-neighbor Ising model nucleation
occurs much earlier than the time whenm ﬁrst becomes negative.  Instead, we determine the
probability that mt+1 <mt and choose the value of m0 to be the value of m for which this
probability is greater than 95%.  The values ofm0 for diﬀerent values of the linear dimension
L are shown in Table I.
   Our goal can be expressed as follows:  given a two-dimensional conﬁguration of spins as
input, we wish to train a statistical model to predict the probability pnuc  that the system
will nucleate within the time tnuc.  We choose tnuc = 50 for R = 1 and tnuc = 25 for R≥ 10.
As discussed in Sec. II A we estimatepnuc by the intervention method, and and then use this
data in Sec. II B to train the various statistical models to predict pnuc.



   A.    Intervention method

   It is convenient to take t = 0 to be the time that m≤m0 and the simulation is stopped.
We save the spin conﬁgurations at every MC time step for the previous tnuc  MC updates
per  spin.   The  intervention  method  proceeds  by  making ncopies  =  100  copies  of  the  spins
at the intervention time tint < 0.  We then run each copy with a diﬀerent random number
seed and determine the number of copies nsuc that reach m≤m0 within the time tnuc.  The


                                                      4
      FIG. 1:  The time dependence of the nucleation probability pnuc.  The time t = 0
  corresponds to the time at which m ﬁrst satisﬁes m≤m0.  Nucleation occurred before
    t = 0.  Results are shown for R = 1, ∆h = 0.70, L = 10 (•) and R = 10, ∆h = 0.055,
                                                 L = 100 (◦).


nucleation probability pnuc at time t is taken to be pnuc(t) =nsuc(t)/ncopies.  Typical results
for pnuc from the intervention method is given in Fig. 1.
   We did not monitor if the copies nucleated at the same position and time as the original
run.  Because the size of the system in our simulation is relatively small, the probability of
two nucleating droplets in the system at roughly the same time is small.



   B.    Dataset preparation

   There  is  much  more  data  for  which pnuc≈  0  or pnuc≈  1  in  our  original  dataset  and
than for intermediate values of pnuc.  To ensure that the predictions do not favor the most
common values of pnuc, we discard data according to how often their corresponding values
of pnuc occur, so that there is a a uniform distribution of pnuc in the training dataset.
   Before  we  apply  machine  learning  methods,  we  ﬁrst  need  to  determine  if  there  is  an


                                                       5
FIG. 2:  The nucleation probability pnuc determined by the intervention method versus the
magnetization m for (a) R = 1, h = 0.50, L = 100 and (b) for R = 10, h = 1.21, L = 100.
   Recall that m> 0 in the metastable state.  For classical nucleation, m is a reasonable
    indicator of the probability of nucleation.  For R = 10 there is no obvious correlation
                                            between m and pnuc.


obvious  relation  between  the  nucleation  probability  and  the  magnetization m.   Figure  2
shows that for R = 1, the value of m is a reasonable indicator of pnuc.  [xx so what?  what
do you do with this info?  why mention it here?  xx] For R = 10, there is little correlation
betweenm andpnuc.  The squared Pearson correlation coeﬃcient isr21 = 0.37 andr210 = 0.14,
respectively.
   We divide the dataset into training and testing datasets.  The former is used to train the
machine learning models and the latter is used to test the model’s performance by comparing
the predicted probability  ˆpnuc with the value pnuc obtained by the intervention method.
   Because the machine learning methods we use do not take periodic boundary conditions
into account, we translate each spin conﬁguration so that the center of mass of the largest
cluster is at the center of the simulation box. The clusters are determined using the Coniglio-
Klein percolation mapping [21].








                                                      6
III.    MACHINE LEARNING MODELS


   We applied three models: spin-based logistic regression, features-based logistic regression,
and convolutional neural network (CNN).



   A.    Spin-based logistic regression

   The logistic regression models can be summarized as

                                    ˆpnuc(X) =                  11 + exp(−∑N
                                                                   i=1WiXi).                                        (1)
where X  is the input and W  is the weight vector.  During training, the logistic regression
models adjusts the weight vectorW  so that ˆpnuc is as close topnuc as possible.  For the spin-
based logistic regression method, the spin conﬁguration is represented by a one-dimensional
N-element  array X,  with  each  element  corresponding  to  a  spin.   Each  element Wi  can
interpreted as the importance of spin i in the input.  This naive model works well for image
recognition tasks when the features are easy to capture and the input size is not very big.


   B.    Features-based logistic regression


   In the spin-based logistic regression model each spin is considered to be an independent
feature.   This  assumption  is  questionable  because  nucleation  is  a  collective  phenomenon.
The idea of features-based logistic regression is to construct a higher level representation of
a conﬁguration with some a priori chosen geometric quantities.  We use this representation
as the input in Eq. (1) with N  replaced by the number of features.  In this way the model
is more concise, but less information is retained about the system.
   We choose the magnetizationm, the average distance to the center of mass of the largest
clusterR(1) and the higher momentsR(k) as our features.  The higher moments are given by
                                              (  1    Ns∑   )1/k,                                                         (2)
                                     R(k) =     Ns        rki
                                                       i
with

                                        X = (m,R(1),R(2),...R(kmax)),                                          (3)

where Ns  is the number of spins in the stable (down) direction,  and ri  is the distance of
(down) spin i to the center of mass of the largest cluster.  We include R(k) up to kmax = 9.

                                                        7
The model’s representation is the same as Eq. (1), withX now represented by the geometric
features in Eq. (2).



   C.    Convolutional Neural Network

   A convolutional neural network conducts convolution operations in a small local region
called a “ﬁlter,” and sweeps this ﬁlter through the entire input.  This behavior allows it to
detect local geometrical correlations of the spin conﬁgurations with translational invariance,
meaning that the model gives exactly the same response, no matter where the features of
interest  appears  in  the  input  [22].   We  used  a  multi-layer  CNN.  Between  each  layer  of  a
convolutional operation,  we insert a maxpool layer to extract the important information.
ForR = 1 we use a 2-layer CNN, with eight and sixten 5× 5 ﬁlters respectively.  ForR = 10
we use a three layer CNN with 16,  32,  64 ﬁlters respectively.  The maxpool layer takes a
maximum of every 2× 2 window.  To prevent over-ﬁtting,  we place a dropout layer after
each CNN layer, with a dropout rate of 0.15 [23].
   The models are trained with ADAM optimizer [24], with learning rate 0.0003, β1 = 0.99,
and β2 = 0.999 to minimize the mean square error between pnuc and  ˆpnuc deﬁned as

                                          MSE =⟨[pnuc− ˆpnuc]2⟩.                                                 (4)



IV.    RESULTS


   A.    Predicting the probability of classical nucleation

   We applied the three models to the nearest-neighbor Ising model withh = 0.50 and values
of L between 10 to 100 to determine the dependence of the performance of each model on
L.  Each model was averaged over a 10-fold cross-validation [25].  From Fig. 3 we see that
both logistic regression models show only a weak dependence on L, but the performance of
the CNN signiﬁcantly decreases with increasing L.
   Because the largest cluster is at the center of the lattice and its size is independent of L,
increasing L does not yield more useful information.  For features-based logistic regression,
the surrounding background makes no contribution to the calculation of the geometric fea-
tures.  For example, for spin-based logistic regression, the model learns to reduce the weights


                                                      8
    FIG. 3:   Dependence of the mean square error of spin-based logistic regression (▼),
    features-based logistic regression (•), and CNN (■) on the linear dimension L of the
   nearest-neighbor Ising model.  The performance of the two logistic regression methods
 depends only weakly on L, but the performance of the CNN decreases with increasing L.


of the background spins in Eq. (1) because they do not contribute to the model’s predicted
values of  ˆpnuc.  In contrast, because the ﬁlter for the CNN sweeps through the entire input
conﬁguration, these values overwhelm the CNN with useless information, which we suspect
is the main reason for the decrease in CNN’s performance with increasing L.  That is, the
CNN tunes the weight on the ﬁlters, which sweep through the entire grid.



   B.    Predictions for the long-range Ising model

   Figure 4 compares the values of ˆpnuc predicted by the three models to the actual nucleation
probabilities pnuc  for R  =  10  and  ∆h  =  0.06.   We  see  that  CNN  demonstrates  the  best
performance, with the mean-square-error of CNN and features-based logistic regression equal
to 0.0046 and 0.0084, respectively. Both models perform much better than spin-based logistic
regression.
   As mentioned in Sec. I, the closer the OFC model is to the noise-induced critical point,
the less predictable is the size of the events given the stress conﬁguration of the system [11].
We now determine if a similar loss of predictability occurs as the spinodal in the long-range
Ising model is approached.
   Because the probability of nucleation and thus the lifetime of the metastable state depends


                                                      9
FIG. 4:  Comparison of pnuc and the values of  ˆpnuc generated by the three machine learning
     models near the spinodal with ∆h = 0.06, R = 10, and L = 100.  The diagonal line
   represents perfect prediction.  The predictions of features-based logistic regression and
CNN are reasonably accurate.  The mean-square-error of CNN is equal to 0.0046 compared
           to the mean-square-error of 0.0084 for features-based logistic regression.


on the Ginzburg parameterG∼R2∆h (in two dimensions) [12], we increaseR as we decrease
∆h to keep G ﬁxed at G = 6.  In this way the lifetime of the metastable state is at least
104 MC steps per spin as we increase h toward hs = 1.27, the value of the spinodal critical
point for T  = 4Tc/9.
   We  set L  =  200  to  ensure  that  the  input  size  is  not  a  factor  when  we  compare  the
performance  of  the  same  CNN  model  for  diﬀerent  values  of R.   Each  CNN  model  was
trained on 7000 data points and validated on 1000 data points.  Our results for the mean
square error are shown in Fig. 5.  The error is calculated based on a 10-fold cross-validation.
We see that ash approacheshs, the CNN model exhibits worse performance.  This decrease
is discussed in more detail in Sec. V.



   C.    Temporal and spatial input

   So far we have used spatial information to generate predictions for pnuc.  In the following
we discuss our results using temporal information only and a combination of temporal and

                                                     10
FIG. 5:  The performance of the CNN as the magnetic ﬁeld h approaches hs for ﬁxed linear
dimension L = 200.  The interaction range R is chosen so that the Ginzburg parameter G
is constant with G = 6.  As h approaches hs, the performance of the CNN model becomes
                                                 less robust.


spatial information.  Figure 6 shows the evolution of the magnetization m and the energy
per spin E/N  before nucleation.  The large ﬂuctuations of m and E/N  make it diﬃcult to
use their evolution to make predictions.  However, if we use the Coniglio-Klein percolation
mapping to determine the largest cluster smax, we see that the evolution of the number of
spins in the largest cluster has a much smaller variance
   We chose m, E, or smax as input to train three one-dimensional CNN models to predict
ˆpnuc  near the spinodal with ∆h = 0.06, R = 10, and L = 200.  The input corresponds to
the  last  25 MC  steps  per  spin  prior  to t  =  0,  similar  to  how  we  trained  the  CNN  using
only spatial information.  The performance of the three models is compared in Fig. 7.  As
expected,  the  evolution  of  the  directly  measurable  quantities m  and E  is  not  helpful  for
determining  ˆpnuc.  The predicted results using smax show some positive correlation with the
true value, but not as strong as when spatial information is used.  We performed the same
task closer to the spinodal and found that the mean square error increases as the spinodal
is approached, as it did using only spatial information, although using spatial information
gave much better predictability.
   We also constructed a machine learning model that combines spatial and temporal infor-
mation with the hope of decreasing the model’s mean square error.  The spatial module takes


                                                     11
                                                                                                    (

 FIG. 6:  The evolution of the energy per spin E/N(•), the magnetization m (◦), and the
 number of spins in the largest cluster smax (□) in the Ising model with R = 10, L = 200,
               ∆h = 0.06.  The evolution is averaged over 1000 nucleation events.


the spin conﬁguration at the time of interest and encodes it with a deep two-dimensional
CNN. The temporal module takes the history of the past 25 MC steps per spin at the time
of interest, and encodes it with a one-dimensional CNN. The two outputs are then concate-
nated and go through two fully connected linear layers to produce ˆpnuc.  As shown in Fig. 8,
the combination of spatial and temporal information does not increase the accuracy of the
model’s predictions.  Because the temporal information is a weak indicator of nucleation,
including it in the input adds uncertainty, which confuses the model.



V.    IMPORTANT FEATURES AND OCCLUSION ANALYSIS

   As discussed in Sec. III A, the weight vector W  in the logistic regression models repre-
sents the importance of each feature in the input.  As shown in Fig. 9, the most important
features of the features-based logistic regression model are the magnetization m (positively
correlated)  and  the  ﬁrst  moment R(1)  (negatively  correlated).   These  correlations  are  ex-
pected:  the more spins in the stable (down) direction, the more likely that nucleation will
occur.  Also the smaller the density of the down spins in the vicinity of the largest cluster,
the less likely nucleation will occur.

                                                     12
  FIG. 7:  Comparison of using m (◦) E/N  (□), or smax (•) as input for determining  ˆpnuc.
 The predicted results from the CNN using smax shows some positive correlation with the
 true value (MSE = 3.96× 10−2).  The evolution of m and E/N  does not lead to accurate
                  predictions (MSE = 9.05× 10−2 and 9.40× 10−2 respectively)


   The values of the higher moments R(k)  are much more important for R = 10 than for
R = 1.  The greater importance of the higher moments is consistent with the prediction of
spinodal nucleation theory that the nucleating cluster has a much larger spatial extent.
   Occlusion analysis is commonly used to visualize and understand what the convolutional
neural network has learned [26].  For the Ising model this analysis is done by choosing a small
region of the input and replacing the spins in the occluded region by zeros, and observing
how much the predictions of the model vary when fed the original and occluded inputs.  The
bigger the diﬀerence, the more important the region.  This process is repeated many times
to obtain an occlusion sensitivity map [26], which illustrates the importance of each part of
the input.
   Figure 10 shows the occlusion sensitivity map for R = 10, ∆h = 0.06, L = 200 averaged
over  the  validation  dataset.   As  expected,  the  most  important  region  in  the  lattice  is  at
the  center,  because  the  input  is  centered  about  the  largest  cluster.   Note  that  the  radius
of  the  sensitive  region  is  comparable  to  the  value  of      Rg  =  19.4,  shown  by  the  red  circle.


                                                      13
   FIG. 8:  Comparison of the performance of pure spatial (■, MSE = 4.43× 10−3), pure
 temporal (•, MSE = 3.96× 10−2), and spatial + temporal (◦, MSE = 6.12× 10−3) CNN
models.  Combining spatial and temporal information made the predictions somewhat less
                            accurate than using spatial information only.


This consistency indicates that the machine acquires useful geometric information from the
region occupied by the largest cluster.
   Occlusion analyses were also done on systems closer to the spinodal for 10<R≤ 20 [xx
not≤?  xx] andL = 200 (see Fig. 11).  As ∆h→ 0, the spatial extent of the sensitive region
increases and the sensitivity decreases.  The size of the sensitive region is comparable to the
radius of gyration Rg of the largest cluster in the system.
   Near the spinodal the nucleating droplet consists of a dense core and a ramiﬁed halo [15].
As ∆h→ 0, the core shrinks, the halo grows, and the density of the cluster approaches the
density of the background (see Fig. 12) [27].  The greater spatial extent of the nucleating
droplet is consistent with the larger radius of the occlusion sensitive region.  The decrease
of the density diﬀerence between the nucleating droplet and the background also explains
the decrease in sensitivity of the occlusion analysis and the decreasing predictability of the
CNN.


                                                     14
  FIG. 9:  The weights corresponding to each geometric feature in features-based logistic
     regression (averaged using cross-validation).  The most important features are the
                             magnetization m and the ﬁrst moment R(1).















FIG. 10:  Occlusion map for R = 10, ∆h = 0.06, and L = 200.  The red circle is the average
radius of gyration of the biggest cluster, which overlaps with the high sensitivity region of
                                             the occlusion map.


   We did a similar occlusion analysis on the temporal CNN described in Sec. IV C. We ob-
serve that the sensitive region in time extends further into the past, which is consistent with
the increasing importance of critical slowing down as the system approaches the spinodal
(see Fig. 13).









                                                     15
        (a) [∆h = 0.042, R = 12,      Rg = 27.                   (b) ∆h = 0.027, R = 15,      Rg = 37.

















        (c) ∆h = 0.018, R = 18,      Rg = 48.                    (d) ∆h = 0.015, R = 20,      Rg = 57.

   FIG. 11:  Occlusion sensitivity maps for the Ising model with R = 10 and L = 200 for
    decreasing values of ∆h, keeping G ﬁxed at G = 6.  The radius of the circular region
 enclosed by the red line is equal to Rg, the mean radius of gyration of the largest cluster.
Note that the size of the occlusion sensitive region becomes larger but less intense, similar
               to the increasing size and decreasing density of the largest cluster.


VI.    SUMMARY

   We applied several machine learning methods to predict the probability of both classical
and spinodal nucleation in the Ising model.  We found that the CNN gives accurate pre-
dictions for classical nucleation and for nucleation close, but not too close, to the spinodal.
We related the decrease of sensitivity found by our occlusion analysis and the decreasing


                                                     16
   FIG. 12:  (a) Dependence of the occlusion sensitivity (red lines) and the density of the
  nucleating cluster (blue dashed lines) on r, the distance from the center of mass of the
  largest cluster.  (b) The radius of gyration of the occlusion sensitivity region is strongly
                   correlated with the radius of gyration of the largest cluster.


diﬀerence between the density of the nucleating droplet and the background to the decrease
in predictability as the spinodal is approached.  Our results indicate that systems near crit-
ical points may be inherently unpredictable by statistical models.  Nevertheless, the CNN
is still a reasonable predictor of nucleation for the nearest-neighbor Ising model and for for
the long-range Ising model if the spinodal is not approached too closely.  And applications
of the CNN can be generalized to other physical systems to make predictions of nucleation
in systems such as dense liquids.





                                                      17
   FIG. 13:  Occlusion sensitivity map for the history of the size of the largest cluster as
               input.  The sensitive region extends further into the past as h→hs.


   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   We would like to give special thanks to Chon-Kit Pun, for his previous work on predicting
event size in OFC model using CNN and Sakib Matin, Thomas Tanzin and Timothy Khouw
for their helpful comments.





 [1]P. Bak and C. Tang, “Earthquakes as a self-organized critical phenomenon,” J. Geophysical

     Research:  Solid Earth 94, 15635 (1989).

 [2]I. G. Main and F. H. Al-Kindy, “Entropy, energy, and proximity to criticality in global earth-
     quake populations,” Geophysical Research Lett. 29, 25 (2002).

 [3]J. M. Beggs and D. Plenz, “Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits,” J. Neuroscience    23,

     11167 (2003).
 [4]D. R. Chialvo, “Emergent complex neural dynamics,” Nature Physics    6, 744 (2010).

 [5]J. Hesse and T. Gross, “Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural systems,”

     Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 8, 166 (2014).

 [6]W. Song, F. Weicheng, W. Binghong, and Z. Jianjun, “Self-organized criticality of forest ﬁre
     in China,” Ecological Modelling 145, 61 (2001).

 [7]H. Saba, J. Miranda, and M. Moret, “Self-organized critical phenomenon as a     q-exponential

     decay—avalanche epidemiology of dengue,” Physica A 413, 205 (2014).


                                                       18
 [8]I. Main, “Earthquake prediction:  concluding remarks, Nature 1 (1999).

 [9]D. Sornette,     Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences, 2nd ed. (Springer, 2006).

[10]K.  Christensen  and  Z.  Olami,  “Variation  of  the  Gutenberg-Richter       b  values  and  nontrivial
      temporal  correlations  in  a  spring-block  model  for  earthquakes,”  J.  Geophysical  Research:

      Solid Earth 97, 8729 (1992).

[11]C.-K.  Pun,  S.  Matin,  W.  Klein,  and  H.  Gould,  “Prediction  in  a  driven-dissipative  system
      displaying a continuous phase transition,” Phys. Rev. E 101, 022102 (2020).

[12]W. Klein, H. Gould, N. Gulbahce, J. Rundle, and K. Tiampo, “Structure of ﬂuctuations near

      mean-ﬁeld critical points and spinodals and its implication for physical processes, Phys. Rev.
      E 75, 031114 (2007).

[13]R. Becker and W. D¨oring, “Kinetische behandlung der keimbildung in ¨ubers¨attigten d¨ampfen,

      Annalen der Physik 416, 719 (1935).
[14]V.  A.  Shneidman,  K.  A.  Jackson,  and  K.  M.  Beatty,  “On  the  applicability  of  the  classical

      nucleation theory in an Ising system,” J. Chem. Phys. 111, 6932 (1999).

[15]C. Unger and W. Klein, “Initial-growth modes of nucleation droplets,” Phys. Rev. B      31, 6127
      (1985).

[16]W. Hu, R. R. Singh, and R. T. Scalettar, “Discovering phases, phase transitions, and crossovers

      through unsupervised machine learning:  A critical examination,”  Phys. Rev. E 95,  062122
      (2017).

[17]J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko, “Machine learning phases of matter,” Nature Physics      13,

      431 (2017).

[18]A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional
      neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems  (2012), pp. 1097–

      1105.

[19]B.  C.  Cs´aji,  “Approximation  with  artiﬁcial  neural  networks,”  Faculty  of  Sciences,  E¨otv¨os
      Lor´and University 24, 48 (2001).

[20]The spinodal is well deﬁned only in the mean-ﬁeld limit. For ﬁnite interaction ranges      R≫ 1,

      the spinodal is replaced by a pseudospinodal. For simplicity, we will refer to the pseudospinodal
      as a spinodal. See N. Gulbahce, H. Gould, and W. Klein, “Zeros of the partition function and

      pseudospinodals in long-range Ising models,” Phys. Rev. E69, 036119 ??(2004).



                                                           19
[21]A.  Coniglio  and  W.  Klein,  “Clusters  and  Ising  critical  droplets:   a  renormalisation  group

      approach, J. Phys. A: Mathematical and General 13, 2775 (1980).

[22]In this case it is not necessary to position the largest cluster at the center. However, when we
      do the occlusion analysis in Sec. V, it is convenient to place the largest cluster at the center

      so that we can average over many conﬁgurations.

[23]N.  Srivastava,  G.  Hinton,  A.  Krizhevsky,  I.  Sutskever,  and  R.  Salakhutdinov,  “Dropout:  a
      simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,” J. Machine Learning Research 15,

      1929 (2014).

[24]D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam:  A method for stochastic optimization,” Third International
      Conference on Learning Representations (2015), arXiv 1412.6980 (2014).

[25]R. Kohavi et al., “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model

      selection,” in Ijcai Vol. 14, Montreal, Canada (1995), pp. 1137–1145.
[26]M.  D.  Zeiler  and  R.  Fergus,  “Visualizing  and  understanding  convolutional  networks,”  in

      European Conference on Computer Vision (Springer, 2014), pp. 818–833.

[27]K. Binder, “The Monte Carlo method for the study of phase transitions:  A review of some
      recent progress,” J. Computational Phys. 59, 1 (1985).

[28]P.  Mehta,  M.  Bukov,  C.-H.  Wang,  A.  G.  R.  Day,  C.  Richardson,  C.  K.  Fisher,  and  D.  J.

      Schwab, “A high-bias, low-variance introduction to Machine Learning for physicists,” Phys.
      Reports 810, 1 (2019).























                                                           20