      Maximally Localized Dynamical Quantum Embedding for Solving Many-Body
                                                       Correlated Systems

                   Carla Lupo,1 François Jamet,1, 2 Terence Tse,1 Ivan Rungger,2 and Cedric Weber∗1
         1King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter, The Strand, WC2R 2LS London, UK
                            2National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, TW11 0LW, United Kingdom

                  We present a quantum embedding methodology to resolve the Anderson impurity model in the
               context of dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory, based on an extended exact diagonalization method. Our
               method provides a maximally localized quantum impurity model, where the non-local components of
               the correlation potential remain minimal. This method comes at a large beneﬁt, as the environment
               usedinthequantumembeddingapproachisdescribedbypropagatingcorrelatedelectronsandhence
               oﬀers apolynomial increase O(N4) of the number of degrees of freedom for the embedding mapping
               without adding bath sites. We report that quantum impurity models with as few as 3 bath sites
               can reproduce both the Mott transition and the Kondo physics, thus opening a more accessible
               route to the description of time-dependent phenomena.  Finally, we obtain excellent agreement
               for dynamical magnetic susceptibilities, poising this approach as a candidate to describe 2-particle
               excitations such as excitons in correlated systems.  We expect that our approach will be highly
               beneﬁcial for the implementation of embedding algorithms on quantum computers, as it allows for
               a ﬁne description of the correlation in materials with a reduced number of required qubits.


                                                               Introduction

  The understanding of materials with strongly correlated electrons is one of the main challenges of modern solid
state physics. Triggered by the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in copper-oxides, the study of doped
Mott insulators has grown in the last decades, building on the development of theoretical tools designed to solve
models of strongly correlated electrons accurately. Despite lacking in terms of the exact solution of simple correlated
theoretical models in two or three dimensions, accurate predictions for the properties of strongly correlated solids are
obtained by using approximations [1]. A central role has been played by the dynamical mean ﬁeld theory (DMFT)[2],
a non-perturbative method that allowed for the ﬁrst complete description of the Mott-Hubbard transition.  This
method has been extended to a variety of correlated methods and combined with density functional theory, leading to
remarkable agreement with the properties of many correlated materials. DMFT more generally falls within the larger
group of quantum embedding theories [3, 4] (for a review, see Ref.[[5]] and references therein), which have been widely
successful at describing transition metal and f-elements into both solids and molecular systems. The central idea of
DMFT is to self-consistently map the inﬁnite bulk system onto a so-called Anderson impurity model (AIM) with only
a few interacting impurity sites embedded in an inﬁnite non-interacting bath. The latter Anderson impurity models
can be solved using high-level many-body methods, with a breadth of approaches for all have their own limitations.
Indeed, the recent development of CTQMC has generated strong activity in the ﬁeld. For single-site DMFT, CTQMC
yields an exact solution to the AIM problem within the statistical error bars in imaginary time. The main limitation
of the approach is that the evaluation of real-frequency spectra requires a poorly conditioned analytical continuation
based on the maximum entropy method[6, 7] (or some alternative strategy), which strongly limits the possibility to
study ﬁne details of the spectra. For multi-orbital or cluster extensions of DMFT, CTQMC suﬀers from thefermionic
sign-problem as long as inter-orbital hybridizations are present, and it is therefore limited to ﬁnite temperatures.
  Numerical renormalization group (NRG) [8] provides an alternative for real axis calculations and access to Kondo
physics, but remains challenging to extend for multi-orbital systems.
  Finally, exact diagonalization (ED) solvers are instead based on a ﬁnite discretization of the AIM through repre-
sentation of the eﬀective bath in terms of a small number ofbath-sites. In practical implementations, the bath size
(Nb) is severely limited because of the growth of the Hilbert space: its dimension scales exponentially with the total
number of sites Ns (bath sites and impurity orbitals). Nonetheless, the use of Lanczos-based algorithms allows to
deal with large Hilbert spaces, and the discretization at low temperature [9, 10] is ﬁne enough to compute the ther-
modynamic and static observables accurately. In particular, the ﬁnite size eﬀects aﬀect the spectral functions, which
are slowly converging to the continuous features of the exact DMFT solution. Notwithstanding reasonably accurate
static phase diagrams obtained with the Lanczos solver for three [11, 12] and ﬁve [13] orbitals system, the limitation
in the bath size also becomes particularly relevant for multi-orbital AIM models, which are necessary to realistically
describe transition metal oxides, as the impurity’s orbitals (ﬁve for ad-manifold) contribute to the enlargement of
the Hilbert space.Toward the achievement of the largest number of bath sites, ED calculations have been extended
to handle the single impurity embedding problem, allowing from O(100) [14–17] up to O(300) [18] uncorrelated bath
                                                                                                                                            2




























Figure 1: From AIM to MLDE. (a) Mapping of the lattice model (with inter-site hopping parameter t and on-site
correlation U) onto a local impurity model, with a correlated atom (yellow sphere) embedded in a non-interacting
bath (blue shaded area) with energy ϵ as for the Anderson impurity model (AIM). The four possible conﬁgurations
describe the quantum evolution of the atom. Electrons may hop from the atom to the bath via the frequency
dependent hybridization function ∆(ω), which plays the role of a dynamical mean ﬁeld. b) Discretization of the
continuum bath in non-interacting bath sites coupled to the interacting impurity through the hopping function Vi.
This is the picture related to the Exact Diagonalization (ED) impurity solver. c) Cartoon related to the Maximally
Localised Dynamical Embedding (MLDE) solver where an interacting impurity is coupled to interacting bath sites.



sites.Although these approaches allow the obtaining of approximations of the zero temperature Green’s function, the
building of systematically high energy excited states remains challenging.Moreover, scaling the precision of the latter
approach on classical computers is not feasible due to the exponential increase of the Hilbert space with the number
of bath sites. In view of the recent progress in the implementation of ED on quantum computers [19], the latter
approach has gained interest due to the possibility of scaling linearly on quantum computers. However, due to current
hardware limitations (noise and decoherence issues), such algorithm are limited to a small number of qubits and short
quantum circuits on the currently available noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computers. Hence it is of great
importance to develop an ED based solver that can obtain precise results with a reduced number of bath sites, since
the required number of qubits is proportional to this.
  In this light, we present here a new quantum embedding methodology to resolve the Anderson impurity model
(AIM) for DMFT, based on an extended ED method. Our method provides a maximally localized quantum impurity
model, where the non-local self-energy component of the correlation remains minimal, and hence the AIM minimally
breaks locality (DMFT is a purely local theory). As reported in this work, this comes at a remarkable beneﬁt, as the
environmentusedinthequantumembeddingapproachisdescribedbypropagatingcorrelatedelectrons(insteadoffree
electrons in DMFT)and hence oﬀers an polynomial increasing of the numbers of degrees of freedom for the embedding
mapping, without increasing the number of bath sites.This is reminiscent of the representation of correlated electrons
by a Green’s function embedding approach, where correlations are described by hidden ﬁctitious additional fermionic
degrees of freedom [20, 21].
  Thisrepresentationhashencethepotentialtoimprovethescopeofapplicabilityofthequantumembeddingapproach
dramatically, whilst limiting the small number of bath sites. We report that quantum impurity models with as few
as 3 bath sites can reproduce both the Kondo regime and the Mott transition and obtain excellent agreement for
dynamical magnetic susceptibilities, poising this approach as a candidate to describe 2-particle excitations such as
excitons in correlated systems, such as high-Tc superconductors [22, 23]. Our approach aligns with recent progress in
                                                                                                                                          3

quantum computing, where a realistic number of qubits would achieve a ﬁne description of correlations in materials.


                                                                 Results

                                                     From the AIM to MLDE

  Within DMFT, the lattice model is mapped to an eﬀective Anderson impurity model (AIM) where a correlated
atom is connected to a non-interacting bath with the hybridization function ∆(ω) as shown in Fig.1.a. In the exact
diagonalization(ED)approximation, thecontinuumbathisrepresentedwithaﬁnitenumberofeﬀectivesites(Fig.1.b).
Typically, for a ﬁxed set of the Hamiltonian parameters (see Eq.1 Methods section), the AIM is solved (1) by using
a Lanczos algorithm to converge the ground state and excited states [9, 12] which contribute to the thermal average.
Once the eigenstates are obtained, the dynamical and static observables are computed. As previously stated, the
number of bath sites is severely limited because of the exponential scaling of the Hilbert space with the number of
sites. To improve the performance of the algorithm, we enlarge the degrees of freedom of the approach introducing a
two-body interaction between the bath electrons (Fig.1.c). The resulting approximation is represented by an extended
ED solver where the non-local component of the correlation potential remain minimal. Thus the exact diagonalization
method has been extended to a maximally localized dynamical embedding (MLDE) model where the same accuracy
is obtained with a reduced number of bath sites. (see Methods section for the formal mathematical deﬁnition of the
model).

















Figure 2: MLDE benchmark. (a) Imaginary and (b) real part of the MLDE with Nb = 3 self-energy (dashed lines)
obtained from on-site correlation U in range 2− 15 for a test hybridisation function for a half-ﬁlled impurity (units
are arbitrary) and compared with continuous time Monte Carlo (continuous line). The scales are in arbitrary units.





                                                        MLDE and CTQMC

  We now turn to a simple test of the MLDE equations for a typical AIM. The bath hybridization used as a test case
is obtained from a typical correlated material [57], and the impurity energy is set to ϵf =−U/2 to stay at half-ﬁlling.
We perform a benchmark of the MLDE approach with respect to both a continuous-time Monte Carlo and Lanczos
solver, which both provide in this case the same answer used as a reference. Both the imaginary part (Fig.2.a) and
real part ( Fig.2.b) obtained by MLDE with as few as Nb = 3 bath sites provide a remarkable agreement with the
exact solution. We considered both the nearly free electron (NFE) limit (U < 10) and the atomic limit (U > 10), and
in both cases the MLDE solution is consistently in agreement with the exact answer. Noteworthy, the strength of
correlation and overall physical properties are also well captured by MLDE with Nb = 2, whereas the ED solver with
the same number of bath sites largely overestimates the strength of correlation (see Fig.3.a). MLDE captures well
the delocalization-localization transition (see Fig.3.b), where the MLDE with Nb = 2 only diﬀers near the transition
while MLDE with Nb = 3 is exact.
                                                                                                                                           4















Figure 3: Strength of correlations. (a) Imaginary part of the self-energy obtained by ED for Nb = 2 (dashed
lines) compared to the exact solution (continuous line). (b) Quasi-particle weight obtained by MLDE with Nb = 2
and Nb = 3 compared to the continuous time Monte Carlo. The MLDE remains close to the exact solution with
Nb = 2, whereas for the same number of bath sites ED vastly overestimates the strength of correlations (see panel
(a)). The scales are in arbitrary units.




                                                             Kondo physics

  We extend further the application of MLDE to a realistic study case of the deposition of a correlated Kondo
molecule on a gold surface (see Fig.4.a). Stable organic radical molecules exhibit a Kondo peak in the low-temperature
experimental conductance, which is due to the presence of a single unpaired electron in the highest occupied molecular
orbital [24–26].  In the gas phase these molecules are paramagnetic.  Due to their low spin-orbit interaction and
small hyperﬁne splitting, they are expected to exhibit long spin-coherence times, and therefore have potential as
building blocks of molecular spintronics applications [26]. When brought in contact with a metal surface, the system
corresponds to a single impurity Anderson model (SIAM) and has been modeled in the past using CTQMC or NRG
as impurity solvers [27, 28].  To demonstrate the capability of MLDE to describe Kondo physics, we choose the
1,3,5-triphenyl-6-oxoverdazyl (TOV) organic radical molecule, which, when deposited on a Au substrate has been
shown experimentally to exhibit a Kondo temperature of about≈ 37K [24]. Compared to other radical molecules on
surfaces, this molecule has the advantage to have a well-deﬁned contact geometry, where the molecule lies ﬂat on the
surface. We use the same simulation setup and parameters as in Ref. [[27]] so that also the hybridization function of
the SIAM is the same (see Fig. S3 in supplementary information). Describing Kondo physics at low temperature is a
notoriously diﬃcult problem for quantum impurity solvers. In particular, the collapse of energy scales in the Kondo
limit prevents typical Lanczos or ED solvers from capturing the Kondo resonance, as the ﬁnite discretization tends
to introduce ﬁctitious gaped states at very low temperature. We performed calculation atT  = 5K. In the Kondo
regime (see Fig.4.b) the hybridization remains constant up to the lowest frequency. We note that ∆1(iωn) = ∆2(iωn),
which conﬁrms that the embedding source ﬁeldδ∆(iωn) remains negligible. Furthermore, MLDE fares better with
Nb = 4 than the best possible ﬁt obtained by the usual discretized Lanczos approach (Nb = 12, triangles in Fig.4.b),
as the hybridization vanishes at small frequencies (in the molecule, it remains constant). The imaginary part of the
self-energy obtained by MLDE shows a Fermi liquid type behavior at small frequencies (see Fig.4.c), whereas the
self-energy obtained by ED shows an artiﬁcial Mott singularity, due to the bath discretization. We note that this low
temperature was beyond the reach of our CTQMC solver (β = 35000). Below the Kondo temperature, we recover the
Fermi liquid behavior of the self-energy (see Fig.4.d). As the MLDE representation is compact, it opens a large degree
of possible manipulation once the AIM is established. In particular, we extended the calculation to the time dynamics
of the Kondo molecule with the Keldysh formalism [29] after a magnetic quench, where at time t0 = 0 the molecule is
magnetically polarized along the ez axis, and the external magnetic ﬁeld released fort>t0. The magnetic moment
enters in a precession dynamics with the frequency equal to the Kondo temperature (see Fig.4.e).The estimated
Kondo temperature which we achieved with diﬀerent methods, e.g. from the time dynamics(TK≈ 33.64) and from
perturbation theory[30, 31] (TK≈ 33, see Section 3 is supplementary information), which provides a further check
of the validity of the MLDE approach.The dynamics can also be resolved below  TK, where we observe additional
harmonics, reminiscent from the Kondo Zeeman splitting at t =t0 (see Ref.[32]).
                                                                                                                                          5



























Figure 4: Kondo physics. (a) TOV organic molecule deposited on a gold substrate at T  = 5K. (b) Imaginary parts
of the molecule’s hybridisation function (AIM), represented by MLDE∆1,2(iωn), and as obtained by the ED solver
with Nb = 12. In the Kondo regime, the hybridisation remains constant up to the lowest frequency, which is not
captured in ED (c) Imaginary part of the self-energy obtained by MLDE shows a Fermi liquid type behaviour at
small frequency (squares), whereas the self-energy shows an artiﬁcial Mott singularity, due to the bath discretization
(truangles). We note that this low temperature was beyond the reach of our CTQMC solver (β = 35000). (d)
Imaginary part of the self-energy in real axis frequencies, MLDE shows a small dip near the Fermi level, which is
associated with the Kondo scale, whereas ED shows an artiﬁcial peak instead. (e) Time dynamics of the
magnetically quenched system: at time t = 0 the system is polarised along the z-axis, upon relaxation we report the
time dependence of the magnetic precession at a temperature T  = 100K (T  = 20K) above (below) the Kondo
temperature (TK≈ 37K). The Fourier transform of the dynamics at T  = 100K shows a peak at ω = 0.0029eV
(= 33.64 K). The dynamics at T  = 20K shows sub-harmonics reminiscent at ω = 0.0027eV (= 31.32 K) from the
Zeeman splitting at time t = 0.




                                                            Mott transition

  We have so far focused on simple AIM systems in the absence of mean-ﬁeld corrections to the hybridization. We now
turn to the dynamical mean-ﬁeld MLDE approach, applied to the Mott transitionwhere the local Green’s function
is deﬁned with the density of state ofthe two-dimensional square-lattice Hubbard model (see Fig.5.a). Using the
MLDE as a solver for DMFT, we recover the well-known metal-insulator transition (MIT) associated with the charge
localization induced by the local Hubbard repulsion U.[58] We recover with a simple MLDE and Nb = 3 bath sites
the spectral function of the Hubbard model, with the usual features (lower and upper Hubbard bands, quasi-particle
peak below the transition Uc≈ 9, Mott gap for U >Uc). We note that interestingly the spectral function obtained
by MLDE also shows the satellite peaks at the gap edge for U >Uc.This feature is typically diﬃcult to obtain with
analytically continued spectral function from Matsubara quantity. Indeed the inner peak near the Mott gap edge are
associated with the real part of the self-energy, and in particular, is derived from an actual quasi-particle solution
[33].
The MLDE charge gap ∆ reproduces the known trend ∆ =U−W, which provides a further test of the theory. The
benchmark with the converged solution obtained by CTQMC is remarkable (see Fig.5.b), and the MLDE solution
essentially within the error bars of the CTQMC forU/t = 12. Across the Mott transition, the agreement between the
Green’s functions remains good (see Fig.5.c).
                                                                                                                                            6




























Figure 5: Mott transition. (a) Spectral function obtained for the square lattice Hubbard model solved by MLDE
(Nb = 3 for all calculations) with increasing values of the on-site dimensionless correlation ratio U/t. For U smaller
than the critical value Uc≈ 9, the system remains metallic, with a quasi-particle weight (sharp peak at zero),
Hubbard lower and upper bands, and band edge satellites that develop near U/t≈ 6. In the Mott phase (U/t> 10)
we obtain a Mott charge gap ∆≈U−W, where W/t = 8 is the bandwidth for the square lattice. (b) Imaginary
part of the self-energy obtained for U/t = 12 at diﬀerent MLDE iteration of the self-consistent cycle. At iteration14,
the self-energy is converged, and within the error bar or the converged CTQMC solution. (c) Converged imaginary
part of the MLDE Green’s function for diﬀerent values ofU/t (symbols) compared with the DMFT CTQMC
solution (dashed lines). Note the real part of the Green’s function is zero in a particle-hole symmetric system.




                                                      Bethe-Salpeter Equation

  We extended the calculations to the Bethe-Salpeter Equation (BSE) formalism, applied to the MLDE solution. In
particular we calculate the local irreducible vertex Γ (see supplementary information), which enables the calculation
of the non-local dynamical magnetic susceptibility χmag(ω) within MLDE. We performed calculations for U/t = 12
at various temperatures, to explore the behavior of magnetic excitations across the Mott gap melting. Within the
Mott gap phase at temperatureT/t = 0.025 (Fig.6.a), the Neel ﬂuctuations are local in momentum atQNeel = (π,π).
As expected, the spin ﬂuctuations are largely located atQNeel in the Mott phase (T  = 0.025t).We observe that the
antiferromagnetic magnetic ﬂuctuations become gradually more incoherent as the temperature is increased throughout
(Fig.6.b). Interestingly, we observe a large degree of incoherence at all considered temperature, which is reminiscent of
the large scattering rate of the archetypal Mott system La2CuO4.At very large temperature (Fig.6.c), the ﬂuctuations
are fully incoherent, and the spectrum uniform across the Brillouin zone.
  We note that a known challenge for the BSE approach is the extraction of the local irreducible vertex Γ, which is
obtainedbycalculatingthetwo-electronresponsefunctionG(2). Suchaquantityrequirestraditionallycomputationally
demanding collection of statistics by CTQMC and few other alternatives exist. The vertex can be calculated in the
Lehman representation (see supplementary information), but requires sampling over the whole Hilbert space, which
is not possible for AIM with more than few bath sites. In MLDE this task is largely simpliﬁed as the Hilbert space
remains compact. We provide a benchmark of the local vertex Γ with CTQMC for both U/t = 6 and U/t = 12 (see
respectively Figs.6.e and 6.g), in both cases the agreement is quantitative. This agreement is also obtained in the
fermionic representation of the local magnetic susceptibility χiν,iν (see Figs.6.d and 6.f).
                                                                                                                                         7







































Figure 6: Dynamical susceptibility. Momentum resolved spin susceptibility obtained by Bethe Salpeter with the
vertex calculated with MLDE in the Hubbard model with U/t = 12, at increasing temperature T/t = 0.025 (a),
T/t = 1 (b), T/t = 10 (c). We report that the magnetic susceptibility at (π,π) is enhanced as the system reaches
the meltdown of the Mott gap (b), and then at very high temperature (c) becomes uniform. As the MLDE
calculations only involves Nb = 3 bath sites, the vertex is fully tractable at any temperature. d) Magnetic
susceptibility χ and e) irreducible vertex Γ resolved in fermionic frequency iν obtained by MLDE (continuous line)
and compared with the exact vertex (dashed line) at temperature T/t = 0.025 and U/t = 6. Respectively χ (f) and
Γ (g) obtained in the Mott phase for U/t = 12. The agreement is remarkable.




                                                 MLDE on a quantum computer

  On classical computers, the computational cost increases exponentially with system size, both for ED and MLDE,
while quantum computers can potentially reduce this to a polynomial scaling [34, 35].  On near term quantum
computers the noise limits the size of calculations that can be done in practice, so that only very small proof of
concept DMFT systems have been demonstrated on hardware [36]. Since MLDE signiﬁcantly reduces the number
of sites needed to describe a given physical system, it allows to reduce the required number of qubits as well as the
depth of the quantum circuits. Therefore, in the near term, it is an ideal framework to run larger physical systems
on NISQ devices, while in the long term, the reduction of the required number of sites will be greatly beneﬁcial also
in the fault-tolerant quantum computing regime.
  Therefore, hereweproposeaquantumalgorithmtorunMLDEonNISQdevicesanddemonstrateitusingaquantum
simulator on the benchmark system considered in Fig. 2. To calculate the Green’s function on a quantum computer,
we use the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) based method presented in Ref. [36], which was demonstrated
                                                                                                                                          8

















Figure 7: MLDE on a quantum computer Imaginary part of the self-energy as function of the Matsubara
frequencies for the MLDE system presented in Fig. 2 and U = 6, computed using the quantum computing algorithm
(“MLDE-VQE”, blue solid curve), and compared to the results obtained with the conventional computing algorithm
used also for all results presented in Fig. 2 (“MLDE-exact”, red dashed curves).


to run on currently available hardware as it is rather resilient to noise.  Details of the method are presented in
the supplementary information. Here we show results obtained with our implementation within the Quest quantum
simulator[37]. To demonstrate that the quantum MLDE algorithm gives the same accuracy as the classical MLDE
algorithm, we apply it on the same Anderson impurity model shown in Fig. 2. The system has one impurity site and
two bath sites, which we map to a 6 qubit system using a Jordan-Wigner transform [38]. In Fig. 7 we show that the
self-energy forU = 6 computed with the quantum computing algorithm agrees very very well with the result obtained
using the classical computing algorithm. We have veriﬁed that the same is true for all values ofU. This, therefore,
demonstrates the functionality of our quantum algorithm for MLDE.


















Figure 8: MLDE multiorbital correlated LaNiO3: We compare the Self energy of the ﬁrst iteration of the
self-consistent DMFT loop (panel a) and the Green’s function for the ﬁnal iteration (panel b) for theeg orbitals of
the Ni ion in the LaNiO3 (dz2 in red and dx2−y2 in blue). In both case, we compare the quantities obtained with
MLDE with 3 sites in the bath (solid line) with the quantities obtained with CTQMC (dashed line). In both case,
the MLDE is in a good qualitative agreement with the CTQMC result.




                                                  MLDE for multiorbital system

  So far, we have considered a single orbital case as a proof of concept of the formalism. To highlight the novelty and
the advantage of the MLDE solver, we now turn to the application to a multi-orbital case. The ED solver has been
notoriously limited for the case of multi-orbital systems (see Ref. [39])as it would require a large number of bath sites,
                                                                                                                                         9

whereas CTQMC solver would be aﬀected by the sign problem triggered by the non-zero oﬀ-diagonal terms of the
hybridizationbetweentheorbitals. Therefore, inthissection, wedemonstratetheabilitytotreatmulti-orbitalsystems
within MLDE framework. As a test system, we applied DFT+DMFT on LaNiO3, whose nontrivial contributions
stemming from electronic correlations have been studied using CTQMC solver [40]. In particular, its eg active sites
pose this compound as our ideal candidate of two orbitals system.  Our main focus is the comparison between a
standard DFT+DMFT implementation using CTQMC and ED impurity solver with our MLDE environment with 3
bath sites. As shown in Fig 8a, a good agreement is achieved between CTQMC and MLDE when considering the
local self energy for the ﬁrst iteration of the DMFT loop. We also show the local self energy obtained with ED using
3 bath sites. Notice that, diﬀerently from the results obtained by MLDE, the ED solver does not well capture the
correct self energy behavior. A better agreement between the ED solver and the CTQMC would be achieved at the
cost of adding more bath sites to increase the number of degrees of freedom for the ﬁt of the hybridization as it is
done in MLDE.
Lastly, we consider the local Green’s function for the ﬁnal iteration of the self-consistent DMFT loop. Notice that
while we only include 3 sites in the bath, the MLDE Green’s function is in a good agreement compared to CTQMC
results.


                                                               Discussion

  In conclusion, we introduced a novel quantum many-body embedding techniques, the so-called Maximally Localized
Dynamical  Embedding approach (MLDE), which oﬀers a robust and eﬃcient methodology to describe electronic
correlations in quantum materials. This approach generalizes the local dynamical mean ﬁeld theory to minimally
non-local Anderson impurity model, remarkably opening up the resolving power of the discretized impurity model.In
particular, when the number of poles described by a canonical DMFT hybridization scales linearly with the number of
quantum impurity sites, the latter increases exponentially in MLDE.This opens new avenues in the realm of quantum
computing where, with a realistic number of qubits (typically 10-20), MLDE would allow describing transition metal
systems on a quantum computer, with minor errors induced by the bath discretization. As the MLDE hamiltonian
is minimal (typically 4 sites in total), we have shown that time evolutions (Keldysh) and vertex calculations become
routinely possible at a minimal cost. Finally, the correlated bath sites of MLDE also allows to describe Kondo physics
at very low temperature, which is a known limitation of standard exact diagonalization DMFT approaches, and it
lays the foundations for future works on time-dependent non-equilibrium phenomena.


                                                                Methods

  Within DMFT, the eﬀective AIM is subject to a self-consistency condition which relates the Green’s function of
the impurity model G(iωn) to the so-called Weiss-ﬁeldG−10   (iωn), which completely characterizes the AIM. For the
single-band case, the Hamiltonian of the AIM reads:


                               H =∑ϵijσ ˆd†iσ ˆdjσ +∑        Vi( ˆd†iσ ˆfσ +hc) +U ˆnf↑ˆnf↓ +∑      ϵf ˆf†σ ˆfσ                    (1)
                                     ijσ                 iσ                                     σ

  whered†pσ (dpσ) creates (destroys) a particle with spinσ in the d-orbitals of the uncorrelated bath (p∈ [1,Nb]) and
f†σ (fσ) creates (destroys) a spinσ particle on the impurity,U is the static Coulomb repulsion on the impurity and V
is the tunneling amplitude between the impurity and the bath.
In the maximally localized dynamical embedding approach (MLDE), we add an additional general two-electron inter-
action to the bath sites, and the interaction vertex reads:

                                              Hint = ∑       ∑    U(2)
                                                                    i,j,k,l ˆd†iσ1 ˆd†jσ2 ˆdkσ2 ˆdlσ1                               (2)
                                                      σ1,σ2 i,j,k,l

  The U(2) tensor is a ﬁctitious two-body interaction between bath electrons introduced to enlarge the degrees
of freedom of the approach.  Although the free electron propagator takes a simple polynomial form, e.g. G−10    =
iωn−ϵf−∑iV 2i / (iωn−ϵi), a correlated green’s function is instead described by a mapping to an exponentially
                                                                                                                                        10

long one-dimensional chain within the Kryvlov space [41]. In particular, when the bath is correlated, the Weiss ﬁeld
incorporates the dressed propagator of the bath electrons G(1)d :


                                                    G−10   =iωn−ϵf−V†G(1){zd V|     },                                    (3)

                                                                             ∆(1)
  where the hybridization to the bath is denoted as  ∆(1). We emphasize that at this level of the theory, the self
energy of the impurity  Σf remains naught, and hence we have a fully local theory from the perspective of the
impurity. However, as we introduce a local correlation U on the impurity, two eﬀects occur: i) the propagator of the
bath G(1)d  is dependent on the correlation on the impurity, and hence changes to G(2)d  and ii) a non-local part of the
self-energy Σfd between the impurity and the bath emerges:


                                        G−1 =iωn−ϵf− (V† + Σ†|         fd)G(2){zd  (V  + Σfd)}−Σf                           (4)

                                                                           ∆(2)
  We have now a set of embedding equations, which leads to a generalized Dyson equation G−1(z)−G−10  (z)  =
Σf(z)−δ∆(z), where the δ∆(z) is a source ﬁeld that stems from the non-local correlations. Indeed, the latter term
can be rationalized following a simple argument via the Migdal energy functional, which in MLDE reads

                                                                                            
                                           U⟨ˆn↑ˆn↓⟩ = 1   Tr (ΣfGf) +Tr (ΣfdGfd)                             (5)
                                                         2                    |     {z     }
                                                                                     ¯Z
  Part of the correlation energy spills eﬀectively on the bath [42], leading to a correlation leakage term ¯Z.  The
DMFT equations can be recovered when the leakage potential δ∆(z) and leakage correlation energy are small. As
the tuning of the bath propagator allows for a very large set of parameters, these constraints can be successfully
enforced via Lagrange parameters( see cost function deﬁned in Eq. 18 of supplementary information)in the ﬁt of
the DMFT hybridization, to maximize the locality of the embedding, with a concomitant exponential improvement of
the bath discretization errors. It is, however, known that in high dimension, or when a system is strongly correlated,
the electron self-energy is well separable into a local dynamical part and a static non-local contribution [43].  In
this respect, we reabsorb the embedding potential into a shift of the static part of the MLDE self energy, which
ensures that the Migdal energy remains exact.Further details on the derivation of the formalism are reported in the
supplementary information.


                                                         Acknowledgements

  CW acknowledges insightful and stimulating discussions with Andrew Mitchell.  CW was supported by grant
EP/R02992X/1 from the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). I. R. and F. J. acknowl-
edge the support of the UK government department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy through the UK
national quantum technologies programme (InnovateUK ISCF QUANTIFI project). C.L. and F. J. are supported by
the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Cross-Disciplinary Approaches to Non-Equilibrium Systems (CANES,
EP/L015854/1). F.J is supported by the Simons Many-Electron Collaboration. This work was performed using re-
sources provided by the ARCHER UK National Supercomputing Service and the Cambridge Service for Data Driven
Discovery (CSD3) operated by the University of Cambridge Research Computing Service (www.csd3.cam.ac.uk), pro-
vided by Dell EMC and Intel using Tier-2 funding from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (capi-
tal grant EP/P020259/1), and DiRAC funding from the Science and Technology Facilities Council (www.dirac.ac.uk).


                                                 Author contributions statement

  CW designed the research.  CL and FJ contributed to the code design.  IR and FJ implemented the quantum
computing algorithm.  All authors contributed to the results production and analysis.  All authors reviewed the
manuscript.
                                                                                                                                 11

                                                    Additional information

  The authors declare no competing interests.


                                                  Data and code availability

  The data and the code that support the ﬁndings of this study are available at the following repository
https://codeocean.com/capsule/2140807/tree/v2 or from the corresponding authors (carla.lupo@kcl.ac.uk,
cedric.weber@kcl.ac.uk and ivan.rungger@npl.co.uk).
                                                                                                                                        12

                                                    Supplementary information

                                                       MLDE DERIVATION

  In the manuscript associated to this supplementary information, we introduce a new formalism where the bath is
represented by interacting electrons (’dynamical embedding’), rather than by free electrons as in other ED methods.
This addition allows for an increase in the number of ﬁtting parameters without increasing the number of bath sites.
Considering an interacting bath comes at the cost of introducing non-local components of the impurity self-energy,
which do not arise in DMFT, in which instead of the self-energy only depends on the bath via its hybridization
function. To recover the correct self-energy, those non-local components are minimized or, in other words, ’Maximally
Localised’.

  In this section, we provide an extended derivation of the MLDE formalism. To this end, we start with reviewing the
case of non-correlated bath. We then proceed to introduce the quantities of interest in the MLDE formalism where
bath interactions are included. We also provide the pseudo-code where the algorithm is described in more detail.


                                                   Case of non correlated bath

  Within DMFT, the extended lattice model is mapped to an eﬀective Anderson impurity model (AIM), where a
correlated atom is embedded in a non-interacting bath. As shown in Fig.1.a (main text), the bath represents the
eﬀective medium, and it is coupled to the impurity atom. Indeed electrons may hop from the atom to the bath with
probability amplitudeV giving rise to quantum ﬂuctuations of the local conﬁguration on the single impurity. Within
this mean-ﬁeld approximation, the initial complex many-body problem is reduced to a local problem of a correlated
single site where impurity-solver algorithms are applied. We ﬁrst introduce the Hamiltonian of the Anderson impurity
problem:

                               H =∑ϵijσ ˆd†iσ ˆdjσ +∑        Vi( ˆd†iσ ˆfσ +hc) +U ˆnf↑ˆnf↓ +∑     ϵf ˆf†σ ˆfσ                    (1)
                                     ijσ                 iσ                                     σ
where d†pσ (dpσ) creates (destroys) a particle with spin σ in the d-orbitals of the uncorrelated bath (p∈ [1,Nb]) and
f†σ (fσ) creates (destroys) a spin σ particle on the impurity, U is the static Coulomb repulsion on the impurity and
Vi is the tunnelling amplitude between the impurity and the bath. The free-electron propagator is

                                                   G−10  (iωn) =iωn−ϵf− ∆(iωn)                                   (2)
In the exact diagonalization (ED) approximation, the continuum bath is represented with a ﬁnite number of eﬀective
sites. Hereby, we consider and AIM in a start geometry, where the hybridization ∆(iωn) is discretized as follows:
                                                        ∆(iωn) =∑           Vd
                                                                     d  iωn−ϵd                                       (3)

In the case of correlated impurity, U⁄= 0, the problems acquire a many-body nature, and the electron propagation
is aﬀected by the scattering events, therefore correlations between the electrons in the system. We then introduce
the interacting propagator of the impurity of the AIM in the function of the hopping terms Vd between impurity and
bath sites and onsite energies ϵd of the bath sites:

                                            G−1imp(iωn) =iωn−ϵf− ∆(iωn)− Σ(iωn)                              (4)
The Dyson equation for the impurity reads:
                                                     G−1imp(z) =G−10  (z)− Σf(z)                                     (5)

For our convenience, we report the Green’s function and the self-energyΣ of the problem, in a matrix formalism
Hence:                                                              (                                   )
                                     ( Σf    0 )                       (iωn−ϵf− Σf)            −V
                                Σ =      0   0      and  G−1 =                −V            (iωn−ϵd)                                   (6)

Notice that their dimension is Nb + 1, with Nb being the number of bath sites.
                                                                                                                                         13

                                                       Case of correlated bath

  In the maximally localized dynamical embedding approach (MLDE), we extend the formalism of the ED approx-
imation to include correlations in the bath sites, adding a two-body interaction term in the Hamiltonian, which
reads:
          H =∑      ϵijσ ˆd†            Vi( ˆd†                                ϵf ˆf†σ ˆfσ + ∑   ∑     U(2)
                          iσ ˆdjσ +∑         iσ ˆfσ +hc) +U ˆnf↑ˆnf↓ +∑                                 i,j,k,l ˆd†iσ1 ˆd†jσ2 ˆdkσ2 ˆdlσ1     (7)
                ijσ                  iσ                                     σ              σ1,σ2 i,j,k,l

TheU(2) tensor is a ﬁctitious two-body interaction between bath electrons, which hasN2b +N2b (N2b− 1)/2 nontrivial
components where Nb is the number of bath sites. Therefore the number of ﬁtting parameters for the bath at most
scales as≈N4b due to the presence of the two-body interaction. However, we want to emphasize that this formalism
can be extended further by the addition of higher order terms (e.g. if a three-rank tensor is introduced, the number
of parameters scales at most as N6b) being limited only by the dimension of the Hilbert space.
  Consistent with the previous section, we start from the deﬁnition of the free-electron propagator.

                                                    G−10   =iωn−ϵf− V†G(1)|    {zd  V},                                    (8)

                                                                              ∆(1)

where the hybridisation to the bath is denoted as  ∆(1) and includes a Green’s function for the bathG(1)d  which
is interacting rather then being a free-electron propagator as in Eq.(). Notice that at this level of the theory, the
self-energy of the impurity Σf remains naught, and hence we have a fully local theory from the perspective of the
impurity.
We now turn to the case of non-zero correlation on the impurity. As stated in the main text, two eﬀects occur:

    • the interacting propagator on the bath is now aﬀected by the correlation in the impurity. Therefore a new
      deﬁnitionG(2)d  is introduced

    • a non-local part of the self-energy Σfd between the impurity and the bath emerges

Therefore the interacting Green’s function is deﬁned as

                                       G−1imp =iωn−ϵf− (V† + Σ†|        fd)G(2){zd  (V  + Σfd)}−Σf                          (9)

                                                                            ∆(2)
We have now a set of embedding equations, which leads to a generalized Dyson equation

                                                       G−1− G−10   =δ∆− Σf                                     (10)

where the δ∆ = ∆1− ∆2 is a source ﬁeld that stems from the non-local correlations.

  To better clarify the formalism introduced so far, we recall the Green’s function and the self-energy in their matrix
form. Hence:

                                   (                          )                        (                          )
                       G(iωn) =        Gf(iωn)     Gfd(iωn)         and   Σ(iωn) =         Σf(iωn)     Σfd(iωn)                        (11)
                                      Gdf(iωn)     Gd(iωn)                                Σdf(iωn)     Σd(iωn)

[59] A comparison with the matrices deﬁned in the case of non-correlated bath, provides further clariﬁcation on the
consequences of introducing interactions in the bath sites. The block of the self-energy matrix related to the bath
has now an non-zero contribution by deﬁnition of our model. A less trivial observation concern the oﬀ-diagonal terms
which are non zero, due to the interaction leaked in the bonds between impurity and bath sites. Therefore we can
                                                                                                                                         14

distinguish diﬀerent contribution to the correlation energy, and in terms of Migdal energy functional, it reads:
                                            ∑
                                 EtotU   =  2β   Tr[G↑(iωn)(Σ↑(iωn)− Σ↑(∞))] + Tr(R↑Σ↑(∞))                  (12)
                                             iωn
                                            ∑       [                                    ]       (             )
                               EbathU     =  2β  Tr  G↑d(iωn)(Σ↑(iωn)− Σ↑(∞))d             + Tr    R↑dΣ↑d(∞)                           (13)
                                             iωn
                                            ∑       [                                      ]
                                 EintU   =  2β   Tr  G↑fd(iωn)(Σ↑(iωn)− Σ↑(∞))df                                                       (14)
                                             iωn
                                            ∑              (                      )
                           EimpurityU           =  2βG↑f(iωn)Σ↑f(iωn)− Σ↑f(∞)       +R↑fΣ↑f(∞)                          (15)
                                             iωn

whereR is the density matrix. A crucial quantity of the formalism is the leakage ﬁeld, which is deﬁned both statically
EintU , and dynamically


                                                zintU  (iωn) = (Σfd(iωn)· Gfd(iωn))2|iωn|                                        (16)

  Part of the correlation energy spills eﬀectively on the bath [44], leading to a correlation leakage term, which is
deﬁned by
                                                                 (                          )
                                              EleakageU         =    2RffEtotU −EbathU −EimpU                                          (17)

  The locality principle behind the DMFT equations can be recovered when the leakage potential δ∆(z) and leakage
correlation energy are small. As the tuning of the bath propagator allows for a very large set of parameters, these
constraints can be successfully enforced via Lagrange parameters in the ﬁt of the DMFT hybridization, to maximize
the locality of the embedding, with a concomitant exponential improvement of the bath discretization errors. To that
end, the cost function of the minimization procedure is deﬁned as:
              d =∑      |∆1− ∆target|2 +|∆2− ∆target|2 +α3|∆1− ∆2|2                                         ∑   |zintU  (iωn)|       (18)
                                                  |iωn|α1                                   +λs|EleakageU  | +λd
                    iωn                                                                                     iωn

  where the parameters α1,α3,λd,λs are properly tuned according to the case of study to improve the minimisation
procedure. We noticed that in most of the cases, the leakage ﬁeld turns out to be naturally small. Indeed this follows
from the constraint that|∆1− ∆2| has to be minimal. Therefore the ﬁtting process tries to reduce the leakage by
construction.
  It is, however, known that in high dimension, or when a system is strongly correlated, the electron self-energy is
well separable into a local dynamical part and a static non-local contribution [43]. In this respect, we reabsorb the
embedding potential into a shift of the static part of the MLDE self-energy, which ensures that the Migdal energy
remains exact.
  To summarise, in the MLDE formalism, non-local correlations are introduced to enlarge the parameters for the
ﬁtting of the parameters. This represents an improvement over existent ED formalism , as the increased number of
ﬁtting parameters allow the use of less bath sites. The non-locality is kept small through a Lagrange parameter in
the cost function. To recover consistency with MLDE, the leaked (non-local) correlated energy is reabsorbed in the
impurity self-energy. More details on the diﬀerent steps of the algorithm are shown in the pseudo-code (Algorithm
1) reported below.


                                                   Benchmark in real frequency

  In the main text, we preferred to benchmark the MLDE with ED and CTQMC, in the Matsubara formalism,
rather than in real frequency.  Indeed, the spectral functions are notoriously known for being a poor benchmark
when using the continuous fraction method, used for the benchmark ED solver (as the number of bath sites is
large, Lehmann representation of the GF is not achievable).  In particular, reliable benchmarks can be obtained
via the Keldysh formalism and Fourier transforming the time evolution to real frequency [45], but require extensive
                                                                                                                                       15

                                                    Algorithm 1 MLDE solver
  inputs:  ∆target,ϵ,α,α3,λs,λd, U, Nb

Require: Uimp = 0∨Ubath⁄= 0
  call ED solver: input: ϵ, V, output Σ,G
  Σint←−V− Σfd
  G(1)d ←−ϵb− Σd +iωn
  ∆1← Σ†int(G(1)d  )−1Σint
  d1← ∑      |∆1−∆target|2
           n     |iωn|α

Require: Uimp⁄= 0∨Ubath⁄= 0
  call ED solver: output Σ,G
  Σint←−V− Σfd
  G(2)d ←−ϵb− Σd +iωn
  ∆2← Σ†int(G(2)d  )−1Σint
  compute EtotU ,EbathU  ,EimpU   and EleakageU
  d2← ∑      |∆2−∆target|2
           n     |iωn|α
  d3← ∑      |∆2−∆1|2
           n   |iωn|α
  d4←|EleakageU  |
  d5← ∑iωn|zintU  (iωn)|
  d =d1 +d2 +α3d3 +d4λs +d5λd
  Σf← Σf +EleakageU


computing resources for the large systems used as the benchmark. In this regard, we compared the spectral functions
obtained by the MLDE for the Mott transitions with the one obtained by ED (see Fig S2). However, a comparison in
the real axis is less reliable due to the continuous fraction. Moreover, the ill-conditioned maxent approach prevents us
from detailed comparison on the real axis between CTMQC and MLDE. Therefore in the main text of the manuscript,
we have benchmarked the diﬀerent solvers in the Matsubara formalism.


                                            VERTEX CALCULATIONS IN MLDE

  In this section, we provide further insights on the application of MLDE to the calculation of two particle Green’s
function quantities. In particular, the dynamical susceptibility fermionic matrix is computed by inverting the Bethe-
Salpeter Equation (BSE)
                                 χ(q,iΩn)(iνσ)(iν′σ′) = [(χ0(q,iΩn)−1 + Γimp(iΩn)]−1(iνσ)(iν′σ′),                     (19)

where :
                                  χ(q,iΩ)0(iνσ)(iν′σ′) =−δiνiν′δσσ′∑gkσ(iν)gk+q,σ′(iν +iΩ),                      (20)
                                                                         k
and  Γimp is the impurity vertex obtained by inverting the BSE for the MLDE impurity problem.  The impurity
susceptibility reads:
                                  ∫ β                                                                                       ⟩
            G(2)imp(iνσ)(iν′σ′)(iΩ) =                                                      Tτc†σ(τ1)cσ(τ2)c†σ′(τ3)cσ′(τ4)            (21)
                                    0 dτ1dτ2dτ3dτ4eiν(τ1−τ2)+iν′(τ3−τ4)+iΩ(τ1−τ4)⟨
             χimp(iνσ)(iν′σ′)(iΩ) =G(2)imp(iνσ)(iν′σ′)(iΩ)−βδ0ΩG(iν)G(iν′).                                         (22)

  In our work, we compute the two-particle response function G2 via the Lehman representation[46, 47]:
                                       ∑∑
                   G(2)impiνiν′   (iΩ) =  1Z    Φ(Ei,Ej,Ek,El;ωΠ1,ωΠ2,ωΠ3)sign(Π)⟨i|OΠ1|j⟩⟨j|OΠ2|k⟩⟨k|OΠ3|l⟩⟨l|cσ|i⟩
                                        ijkl Π
                                                                                                                                     (23)
                                    ∫ β      ∫ τ1      ∫ τ2
Φ(Ei,Ej,Ek,El;ω1,ω2,ω3) =
                                      0 dτ1    0  dτ2   0  dτ3e−βEi+τ1(Ej−Ei)+τ2(Ek−Ej)+τ3(El−Ek)ei(ω1τ1+ω2τ2+ω3τ3),   (24)
                                                                                                                                          16

where we have introduced the closure relation, and deﬁneO1 =cσ, O2 =c†σ and O3 =cσ′. Ei are the eigenvalues of
the MLDE hamiltonian, Π are the triplet permutations, and the summation holds over all states of the Hilbert space.
  The magnetic susceptibility is obtained as
                                                     ∑
                               χmag(q,iΩn) = 12          χ(q,iΩn)(iν,σ)(iν′,σ)−χ(q,iΩn)(iν,σ)(iν′,−σ).                   (25)
                                                      σ
  In principle, the minimization of the single particle leakage does not guarantee the minimization of the leakage for
the two particle irreducible vertex. For the case we have studied, even without imposing a constraint on the two
particle leakage, the agreement with CTQMC is remarkable. We propose here a diagrammatic argument to support
our ﬁndings, in particular, that MLDE also provides a good estimate of higher order response functions.
  Firstly, the lowest order diagram contributing to the irreducible vertex is given by (see Ref. [48]):

                                                              Γ(1)abcd =Uabcd.                                         (26)

Since in MLDE, there are no direct many-body interaction terms in the Hamiltonian between the impurity and the
bath, this diagram is equal to zero by construction for the cross term contribution. Furthermore, the MLDE non-local
self-energy connecting the bath and the impurity can be expressed in term of the reducible vertex[49]:

                                        Σ(14) =−U(12′3′1′)G(1′4′)G(23′)G(2′3)F (4′234)                          (27)

where F is the reducible vertex, which is related to the irreducible vertex by the Bethe-Salpeter equation

                                       F (1234) = Γ(1234) + Γ(122′3′)χ0(3′2′4′3′)F (3′4′34).                         (28)

Here we use the usual short-handed notations 1 = (τ1,l1,σ1) and assume sum over repeated indices. We now consider
the case of Σ(14) corresponding to the non-local self-energy that connects the impurity to the bath degrees of freedom.
When the left-hand side of eq 27 is minimized in MLDE (reduction of the one-particle leakage), it naturally imposes
that F remains small (for non-local contributions). Moreover, we see from eq 28 that minimizing F also imposes a
minimization of the non-local terms in Γ, that connects the impurity to the bath. In summary, when the non-local
self-energy is minimal, MLDE provides a good approximation of the irreducible vertex used throughout to calculate
the dynamical magnetic susceptibility.
  Finally, we emphasize that it is usually diﬃcult to provide energy cutoﬀs on the low energy converged states of the
Hamiltonian (typically in Lanczos or other iterative approaches), as the Boltzmann statistics only truncates one of the
sums (on index i), whereas all eigenstates are required for the other summation. MLDE provides an ideal candidate
for such calculations, as the number of bath sites can be kept small with very little cost in accuracy. We note indeed
that the previous equation can be arranged to show a computational complexity growing with the cube of the number
of eigenstates n, where n itself grows exponentially with the number of bath sites.


                                               MLDE FOR KONDO MOLECULE

  The density of states (DOS) for diﬀerent temperatures is shown in Fig S4a. The ﬁngerprint Kondo peak around
zero energy can be seen at low temperatures. We emphasize that this feature is notoriously hard to obtain when
using an ED solver as the formalism is aﬀected by the small broadening factor needed to correctly capture this Kondo
physics ﬁngerprint. The Kondo temperature can be obtained from the relation[30, 31] obtained from perturbation
theory, which reads

                                                      TK =−πZ4 ℑ∆(iωn)|ωn→0                                    (29)

With the computed quasi-particle weight (Z = 0.026) and value of the hybridization in the limit of zero frequency (see
Fig S3), we obtain a Kondo temperature ofT  = 33.8 K, which is comparable with the experimental one at≈ 37K [24].
We notice that temperature eﬀect corrections to the Fermi liquid regime can be more easily studied in the Matsubara
self-energy (see Fig S4.b). In this representation, the quadratic behavior of the self-energy is apparent at low energy
scales.
                                                                                                                                     17






















Figure S1: Model hybridization. Real part and imaginary part of the model hybridization used for the MLDE
benchmark.























Figure S2: Benchmark between ED and MLDE in real-frequency We compare the results obtained with ED
(9 bath sites) and MLDE (3 bath sites). In panel a) we report the real par of the impurity Green’s function obtained
solving the AIM for ﬁxedU = 4. In panel b) we report the local Green’s function obtained solving the
self-consistent DMFT loop in the case of the square lattice, for ﬁxed valueU = 12.




                                                  DFT+DMFT FOR LANIO3

  DFT+DMFT calculation is performed within Questaal package [50].  We used the local density approximation
(LDA) functional with a k-mesh 10x10x10 points. The DMFT subspace is deﬁned by the projection on Ni-d orbitals.
The ﬁlledt2g manifold is treated at the Hartree Fock level, and the eg is treated using DMFT. In order to solve the
Anderson impurity model composed of eg orbital, we use MLDE with 2 impurity sites and 3 sites in the bath. The
comparison with an exact solver is done using CTQMC solver in TRIQS Package [51]. The interaction between the
2 eg orbitals is given by the rotationally invariant Slater Hamiltonian
                                                                                                                                        18





















Figure S3: Model hybridization of the TOV molecule on Gold surface. Real part and imaginary part of the
hybridization used for the application of MLDE to study the case of the deposition of the TOV molecule on gold
surface as obtained in Ref.[27]. The impurity energy is set to ϵf =−0.13 (eV) and the temperature is T=5 K. (Units
are in eV).























Figure S4: TOV molecule on Gold surface. a)Density of states as function of real energies for diﬀerent
temperatures and b) data points of the self-energy at T  = 20K (circles) ﬁtted at low frequencies with a quadratic
function.




                                                 Hint = 1     ∑     Uijklc†
                                                          2                iσc†jσ′ckσ′clσ                                 (30)
                                                            ijlk,σσ′
  The tensor Uijkl is given in term of Slater integral

                                                                    2∑
                                                         Uijkl =       αijlkk  F 2k                                       (31)
                                                                   k=0

Where αijlkk   are the Racah-Wigner numbers and Fk are the Slater integrals.
                                                                                                                                          19

  In the literature, we often use the parameter corresponding to the Hubbard interaction U and Hund’s couplingJ
to express Fk with the relations


                                                               U =F 0                                              (32)

                                                               J = F 2 +F 414                                            (33)
                                                             F 4
                                                             F 2  = 10/16                                            (34)
  In this letter, we use the parameters U = 7 and J = 1 as suggested in [40].


                                     MLDE QUANTUM COMPUTING ALGORITHM

  In this section, we present a quantum algorithm to run MLDE on noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) com-
puters. We perform a Jordan-Wigner (JW) transformation [38] to map the MLDE Hamiltionian (Eq. 1) to a qubit
representation. After the transformation, the Hamiltonian is in the form of a linear combination of Pauli tensors.
With the JW transformation, the required number of qubits is two times the number of sites in the system, the factor
two being due to spin.
  To compute the Green’s function, we use a variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) based approach as presented
in [36] since it is rather resilient to noise. The quality of the quantum computing solution corresponds largely to the
ability of the quantum circuit to represent the eigenstates of H, and hence obtain accurate energies and amplitudes
of the peaks in the Green’s function. One, therefore, needs a state preparation ansatz able to accurately represent
the ground state as well as the excited states with one electron added or removed [36]. For the results presented in
the main manuscript, we use a so-called Hamiltonian variational ansatz (HVA) [52] to represent the eigenstates of
H. Note that we obtain a similar accuracy also with diﬀerent types of circuit ansatz, such as a so-called hardware
eﬃcient ansatz[53]. A general quantum state|ψ(θθθ)⟩ is prepared with a circuit ansatz as|ψθθθ⟩ =  ˆU(θθθ)|0⟩, where|0⟩
is the initial state corresponding to all qubits set to the zero state, and  ˆU(θθθ) is the unitary generated by the state
preparation quantum circuit. Here θθθ is a vector of parameters, which determine the speciﬁc state generated by the
unitary. For the HVA U(θθθ) has the form

                                                                 nlayers∏∏
                                                        ˆU(θθθ) =           e−iθkj ˆPj                                     (35)

                                                                    k    j

where Pj is a Pauli tensor in H after JW transformation and θkj a real-valued parameter. The multiplication over
j goes over all Pauli terms in the Hamiltonian. The ansatz corresponds to nlayers repetitions of individual blocks.
In a given block, each Pauli tensor term in H, Pj, is included in the ansatz as imaginary exponentiation with the
parameter θkj, which can be readily implemented on a quantum computer [52]. The accuracy of the ansatz generally
improves with increasing nlayers. We veriﬁed that for the system considered in the main manuscript,nlayesr = 2 gives
good accuracy.
  Toobtainthestatepreparationcircuitparametersforthegroundstate, weminimizethecostfunctioncorresponding
to the ground state energy

                                              EGS = minθθθE(θθθ) = minθθθ⟨ψ(θθθ)|H|ψ(θθθ)⟩.                              (36)

To obtain the state preparation circuit parameters for the excited states there are several possibilities [54–56]. Here
we use the method proposed in [55], where a penalty term is added to the Hamiltonian to impose orthogonality of
each excited state to the lower energy states. To calculate the lth excited state,|ψl⟩ =|ψ(θθθl)⟩, with energy El, one
therefore minimises
                                                                                               
                                                                            l−1∑
                                         El = minθθθ  ⟨ψ(θθθ)|H|ψ(θθθ)⟩ +      αj⟨ψj|ψ(θθθ)⟩2.                          (37)
                                                                            j=0

Here the positive-valued αj are arbitrary parameters, set in a way to optimize the convergence of the algorithm.
Once all required state preparation parametersθθθl are computed, the Green’s function is obtained using the Lehman
representation, and with it, the self-energy [36].
                                                                                                                                                  20





 [1]G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko, O. Parcollet, and C. A. Marianetti, Rev. Mod. Phys.     78, 865
     (2006).
 [2]A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. J. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys.    68, 13 (1996).
 [3]D. Zgid and E. Gull, New Journal of Physics    19, 023047 (2017), URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F1367-2630%2Faa5d34.
 [4]E. Fertitta and G. H. Booth, Phys. Rev. B    98, 235132 (2018), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.98.
     235132.
 [5]Q.  Sun  and  G.  K.-L.  Chan,   Accounts  of  Chemical  Research       49,   2705  (2016),   pMID:  27993005,
     https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00356, URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00356.
 [6]J. E. Gubernatis, M. Jarrell, R. N. Silver, and D. S. Sivia, Phys. Rev. B    44, 6011 (1991).
 [7]O. Gunnarsson, M. W. Haverkort, and G. Sangiovanni, Phys. Rev. B    82, 165125 (2010).
 [8]A. K. Mitchell and L. Fritz, Phys. Rev. B    88, 075104 (2013), URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.
     075104.
 [9]M. Capone, L. de’ Medici, and A. Georges, Phys. Rev. B  76, 245116 (pages 6) (2007).
[10]C. A. Perroni, H. Ishida, and A. Liebsch, Phys. Rev. B      75, 045125 (2007).
[11]M. Capone, M. Fabrizio, C. Castellani, and E. Tosatti, Science      296, 2364 (2002).
[12]A. Liebsch and H. Ishida, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter      24, 053201 (2012).
[13]H. Ishida and A. Liebsch, Phys. Rev. B      81, 054513 (2010).
[14]E. Arrigoni, M. Knap, and W. von der Linden, Phys. Rev. Lett.      110, 086403 (2013), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
     10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.086403.
[15]Y. Lu, M. Höppner, O. Gunnarsson, and M. W. Haverkort, Phys. Rev. B      90, 085102 (2014), URL  https://link.aps.
     org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.085102.
[16]M. Ganahl, M. Aichhorn, H. G. Evertz, P. Thunström, K. Held, and F. Verstraete, Phys. Rev. B      92, 155132 (2015), URL
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.155132.
[17]D. Bauernfeind, M. Zingl, R. Triebl, M. Aichhorn, and H. G. Evertz, Phys. Rev. X      7, 031013 (2017), URL  https:
     //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.7.031013.
[18]Y. Lu, M. Höppner, O. Gunnarsson, and M. W. Haverkort, Phys. Rev. B      90, 085102 (2014), URL  https://link.aps.
     org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.085102.
[19]I. Rungger, N. Fitzpatrick, H. Chen, C. H. Alderete, H. Apel, A. Cowtan, A. Patterson, D. M. Ramo, Y. Zhu, N. H.
     Nguyen, et al., Dynamical mean ﬁeld theory algorithm and experiment on quantum computers(2019), 1910.04735.
[20]S. Sakai, M. Civelli, and M. Imada, Phys. Rev. Lett.      116, 057003 (2016), URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevLett.116.057003.
[21]S. Sen, P. J. Wong, and A. K. Mitchell,    The mott transition as a topological phase transition (2020), 2001.10526.
[22]E. Baldini, M. A. Sentef, S. Acharya, T. Brumme, E. Sheveleva, F. Lyzwa, E. Pomjakushina, C. Bernhard, M. van
     Schilfgaarde, F. Carbone, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 6409 (2020), ISSN 0027-8424,
     https://www.pnas.org/content/117/12/6409.full.pdf, URL https://www.pnas.org/content/117/12/6409.
[23]S. Acharya, C. Weber, E. Plekhanov, D. Pashov, A. Taraphder, and M. Van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. X      8, 021038 (2018),
     URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.021038.
[24]J. Liu, H. Isshiki, K. Katoh, T. Morita, K. Breedlove, Brian, M. Yamashita, and T. Komeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc.      135, 651
     (2013).
[25]Y.-h. Zhang, S. Kahle, T. Herden, C. Stroh, M. Mayor, U. Schlickum, M. Ternes, P. Wahl, and K. Kern, Nat. Commun.
     4, 2110 (2013).
[26]R. Frisenda, R. Gaudenzi, C. Franco, M. Mas-Torrent, C. Rovira, J. Veciana, I. Alcon, S. T. Bromley, E. Burzurí, and
     H. S. Van der Zant, Nano letters 15, 3109 (2015).
[27]A. Droghetti and I. Rungger, Phys. Rev. B      95, 085131 (2017), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.95.
     085131.
[28]W. H. Appelt, A. Droghetti, L. Chioncel, M. M. Radonjić, E. Muñoz, S. Kirchner, D. Vollhardt, and I. Rungger, Nanoscale
     10, 17738 (2018), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C8NR03991G.
[29]M. Balzer, N. Gdaniec, and M. Potthoﬀ, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter     24, 035603 (2012), URL  http://stacks.iop.org/
     0953-8984/24/i=3/a=035603.
[30]H. Lee, E. Plekhanov, D. Blackbourn, S. Acharya, and C. Weber, Communications Physics      2, 49 (2019), URL  https:
     //doi.org/10.1038/s42005-019-0146-4.
[31]B. Surer, M. Troyer, P. Werner, T. O. Wehling, A. M. Läuchli, A. Wilhelm, and A. I. Lichtenstein, Phys. Rev. B      85,
     085114 (2012), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.085114.
[32]R. Žitko, R. Peters, and T. Pruschke, New Journal of Physics     11, 053003 (2009), URL  https://doi.org/10.1088%
     2F1367-2630%2F11%2F5%2F053003.
[33]M. Granath and J. Schött, Phys. Rev. B      90, 235129 (2014), URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.
     235129.
[34]D. Wecker, M. B. Hastings, N. Wiebe, B. K. Clark, C. Nayak, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. A      92, 062318 (2015), URL
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.92.062318.
[35]B. Bauer, D. Wecker, A. J. Millis, M. B. Hastings, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. X      6, 031045 (2016), URL https://link.
     aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.031045.
                                                                                                                                                 21

[36]I. Rungger, N. Fitzpatrick, H. Chen, C. H. Alderete, H. Apel, A. Cowtan, A. Patterson, D. M. Ramo, Y. Zhu, N. H.
     Nguyen, et al., Dynamical mean ﬁeld theory algorithm and experiment on quantum computers(2020), 1910.04735.
[37]T. Jones, A. Brown, I. Bush, and S. C. Benjamin, Scientiﬁc Reports     9, 10736 (2019), ISSN 2045-2322, URL  https:
     //doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47174-9.
[38]E. Fradkin, Phys. Rev. Lett.      63, 322 (1989), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.322.
[39]A. Liebsch and H. Ishida, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter      24, 053201 (2011), URL  https://doi.org/10.1088/
     0953-8984/24/5/053201.
[40]E. A. Nowadnick, J. P. Ruf, H. Park, P. D. C. King, D. G. Schlom, K. M. Shen, and A. J. Millis, Phys. Rev. B      92, 245109
     (2015), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.245109.
[41]M. Cini, From Basic Quantum Mechanics to the Frontiers of Researchi, Springer (2007).
[42]D. Zgid and E. Gull, New Journal of Physics      19, 023047 (2017), URL https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/aa5d34.
[43]T. Schäfer, A. Toschi, and J. M. Tomczak, Phys. Rev. B      91, 121107 (2015), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevB.91.121107.
[44]D. Neuhauser, R. Baer, and D. Zgid, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation      13, 5396 (2017), pMID: 28961398,
     https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00792, URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00792.
[45]F. A. Wolf, A. Go, I. P. McCulloch, A. J. Millis, and U. Schollwöck, Phys. Rev. X      5, 041032 (2015), URL  https:
     //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.5.041032.
[46]A. Toschi, A. A. Katanin, and K. Held, Phys. Rev. B      75, 045118 (2007), URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevB.75.045118.
[47]H. Hafermann, C. Jung, S. Brener, M. I. Katsnelson, A. N. Rubtsov, and A. I. Lichtenstein, EPL (Europhysics Letters)
     85, 27007 (2009), URL https://doi.org/10.1209%2F0295-5075%2F85%2F27007.
[48]G. Rohringer, A. Valli, and A. Toschi, Phys. Rev. B      86, 125114 (2012), URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevB.86.125114.
[49]G. Rohringer, H. Hafermann, A. Toschi, A. A. Katanin, A. E. Antipov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. I. Lichtenstein, A. N. Rubtsov,
     and K. Held, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 025003 (2018), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.90.025003.
[50]D. Pashov, S. Acharya, W. R. Lambrecht, J. Jackson, K. D. Belashchenko, A. Chantis, F. Jamet, and M. van Schilfgaarde,
     Computer Physics Communications 249, 107065 (2020), ISSN 0010-4655, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2019.
     107065.
[51]P. Seth, I. Krivenko, M. Ferrero, and O. Parcollet, Computer Physics Communications      200, 274 (2016), ISSN 0010-4655,
     URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001046551500404X.
[52]R. Wiersema, C. Zhou, Y. de Sereville, J. F. Carrasquilla, Y. B. Kim, and H. Yuen, PRX Quantum      1 (2020), ISSN
     2691-3399, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.1.020319.
[53]A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita, M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature      549, 242 (2017),
     URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23879.
[54]K. M. Nakanishi, K. Mitarai, and K. Fujii, Phys. Rev. Research      1, 033062 (2019), URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
     1103/PhysRevResearch.1.033062.
[55]O. Higgott, D. Wang, and S. Brierley, Quantum      3, 156 (2019), ISSN 2521-327X, URL  https://doi.org/10.22331/
     q-2019-07-01-156.
[56]T. Jones, S. Endo, S. McArdle, X. Yuan, and S. C. Benjamin, Phys. Rev. A      99, 062304 (2019), URL https://link.aps.
     org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.062304.
[57]The hybridization function is available in the supplementary information, Fig.S1
[58]We clarify that DMFT self-consistency is enforced in Matsubara frequency.
[59]Notice that to simplify the notation, the repeated indices are dropped. Therefore   Gdd =Gd.