     Approximating Ground State Energies and Wave
 Functions of Physical Systems with Neural Networks




              Cesar Lema∗                                        Anna Choromanska
         Department of Physics                Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
         New York University                                     New York University
           cl4393@nyu.edu                                         ac5455@nyu.edu


                                                    Abstract

          Quantum theory has been remarkably successful in providing an understanding of
          physical systems at foundational scales. Solving the Schrödinger equation provides
          full  knowledge  of  all  dynamical  quantities  of  the  physical  system.   However
          closed form solutions to this equation are only available for a few systems and
          approximation methods are typically used to ﬁnd solutions.   In this paper we
          address the problem of solving the time independent Schrödinger equation for
          the ground state solution of physical systems. We propose using end-to-end deep
          learning approach in a variational optimization scheme for approximating the
          ground state energies and wave functions of these systems.  A neural network
          realizes a universal trial wave function and is trained in an unsupervised learning
          framework by optimizing the expectation value of the Hamiltonian of a physical
          system. The proposed approach is evaluated on physical systems consisting of a
          particle in a box with and without a perturbation. We demonstrate that our approach
          obtains approximations of ground state energies and wave functions that are highly
          accurate, which makes it a potentially plausible candidate for solving more complex
          physical systems for which analytical solutions are beyond reach.

1    Introduction
In the ﬁeld of quantum mechanics the state of a physical system is given by a wave function. The
wave function is mathematically represented in Dirac notation as an abstract vector|Ψ⟩ in a complex
vector space [1, 2]. In contrast, the state of a physical system in classical mechanics is given by a
point in a phase space [3].  The usefulness of the wave function is conﬁrmed by Born’s statistical
interpretation [4], which has been accepted as a postulate in foundations of quantum mechanics and
interprets the modulus square of a wave function as the probability of a measurement of an observable
at any given time (i.e., the probability for a speciﬁc result in the measurement of an observableX
at any given timet is given by the modulus square of the wave function in the eigenbasis ofX i.e.
|⟨x|Ψ(t)⟩|2). Observables are quantities of a physical system that can be measured and in quantum
theory are mathematically represented by Hermitian operators [2]. As an example, the knowledge of
the wave function allows computing the probability of ﬁnding a particle at any given position or a
particle having a speciﬁc momentum.
Access to the wave function provides full knowledge of all dynamical quantities of a physical system.
In quantum mechanics, dynamical variables, such as the kinetic or angular momentum of a system,
are represented by a combination of position and momentum operators. Their values are computed
as expectation values of the corresponding operator given a wave function.  This is analogous to
classical mechanics, where all dynamical quantities can be represented as a function of position and
momentum. Thus, the wave function ultimately enables to analyze the behavior of physical systems,
including those that cannot be easily studied experimentally.

   ∗undergraduate student
The energy states of a non-relativistic quantum systems [5, 6], which involve particles with speeds
much less than the speed of light, are found by solving the time independent Schrödinger equation
(TISE) given as
                                                H|Ψn⟩ =En|Ψn⟩,                                                           (1)
whereH is the Hamiltonian of a quantum system (Hamiltonian is a Hermitian operator and is equal to
the sum of the kinetic energyT  and potential energyV  operators), and Ψn andEn are thenth eigen
function and eigen value ofH respectively. TISE highlights that the variables characterizing quantum
physical systems, such as momentum, spin, energy, etc., are quantized. TISE is an eigenvalue problem
for the Hamiltonian operatorH and its solution gives the eigenbasis and stationary states for the
energy of a system. TISE is presently the major basic tool of many branches of modern physics [7] as
well as chemistry [8]. For many physical systems, such as electron conﬁguration of atoms, molecular
and strongly interacting many body systems, there are no closed form solutions to TISE [6, 8, 9].
This work offers an accurate numerical way of solving this equation and presents a deep learning
based optimization approach for approximating ground state solutions to TISE.

2    Prior work
Solving TISE typically requires numerical approximations. Among approximation methods, the most
popular are Hartree–Fock, conﬁguration interaction, and coupled cluster [10] methods, conveniently
reviewed in [6], as well as multideterminant quantum Monte Carlo technique [11]. The variational
principle is the foundation for some commonly used methods [6] and provides a simple and ﬂexible
scheme for ﬁnding the ground state solution to TISE . The variational principle gives an upper bound
for the ground state energyEgs of a given (Hermitian) Hamiltonian operatorH.  The expectation
value of the Hamiltonian⟨H⟩ =⟨Ψ|H|Ψ⟩ (Eq.  2) with respect to an arbitrary wave function|Ψ⟩
(from a complex Hilbert space) is the energy⟨E⟩ of the system in the state|Ψ⟩. By deﬁnitionEgs
(the lowest eigenvalue ofH) is the lowest possible energy of the Hamiltonian, therefore⟨E⟩≥Egs.
The choice of the trial wave function|Ψ⟩ determines the tightness of the upper bound onEgs for
a given Hamiltonian and consequently its quality.  Limited prior knowledge of the wave function,
furthermore, affects the accuracy of this method.
Deep learning models have shown incredible aptitude in solving difﬁcult learning problems and
could be used to represent even highly complicated trial wave functions. Therefore deep learning
can  be  perceived  as  a  plausible  candidate  method  for  recovering  the  wave  function  that  leads
to tight variational bound and accurate approximation of the ground state of a physical system.
Integrating artiﬁcial neural networks in a variational optimization method to solve for the ground
state solution of TISE was explored only recently. For spin lattice many-body systems a restricted
Boltzmann machine was used to realize the wave function ansatz in the variational Monte Carlo
(VMC)  method  [9].   For  the  electronic  Schrödinger  equation,  Deep  Neural  Networks  (DNN)
integrated into a wave function ansatz was also explored in the VMC setting   [12, 13, 8].  More
recently, [8] presented a deep learning wave function ansatz that achieved state-of-the-art results
for  solutions  of  the  electronic  Schrödinger  equation  (authors  also  conveniently  summarize  the
existing methods for solving TISE problem in an online video [14]). For simple Hamiltonians, the ra-
dial basis function network [15] was used to realize the wave function ansatz also in the VMC method.

For  arbitrary  Hamiltonians  in  the  VMC  setting,  the  optimal  wave  function  ansatz  are  not
generally known and there exists a trade off between complexity of modeling the wave function
and its accuracy [16, 17, 18].   The work presented here shows how to learn the wave function
approximation in the end-to-end deep learning framework.  We differ from the aforementioned
techniques in a couple of ways: 1) we do not use the ﬁxed expression for the wave function ansatz
but instead model it directly via DNN, 2) our method is not constrained to a speciﬁc physical
system, 3) our technique is simple and does not require sampling steps as opposed to VMC. Due to
the high expressiveness of neural networks and the simplicity of our approach, our work has the
potential to solve TISE for arbitrary and previously inaccessible systems. It also provides a general
framework for solving TISE of discrete and continuous systems (i.e.  solving TISE in ﬁnite and
inﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces).

3    Approach
We propose to approximate the ground state wave function Ψ : Rn→ C (n is the number of particles)
that constitutes the ground state solution to the TISE using a DNN. The expectation value of the


                                                            2
given Hamiltonian (Eq. 2) with respect to the wave function approximated with DNN was used as
the objective function to train DNN. Once DNN approximated the ground state wave function with
high ﬁdelity, this expectation value approached theEgs of the given system. This gives us the ground
state solution of TISE we are looking for. Note that using DNN allows operating in the regime where
the wave function ansatz is universal and unconstrained.  In the context of the variational method,
the neural network serves as the trial wave function|Ψ⟩. Using neural networks to represent the trial
wave function allows to explore a rich set of parameterized wave functions. The approach, therefore,
heavily hinges on the nature of neural networks as universal function approximators.
The Hamiltonian consists of operators which cannot be easily applied to a DNN wave function.
This makes it difﬁcult to directly compute the expectation value of the Hamiltonian using a DNN
ansatz in the variational method.  We propose to numerically compute the decomposition of the
function approximated by the DNN onto a computational basis (that spans the corresponding Hilbert
space) and then compute the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in that computational basis. The
expectation value of the energy of a system (Hamiltonian) with respect to the DNN wave function
can be computed using an arbitrary computational basis according to the following equation:∑∑
            ⟨H⟩ =⟨Ψ|H|Ψ⟩                 x,x′⟨Ψ|x⟩⟨x|H|x′⟩⟨x′|Ψ⟩∑               x,x′ Ψ∗(x)Hxx′Ψ(x′)∑
                        ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩    =               x⟨Ψ|x⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩          =                 x|Ψ(x)|2    ,            (2)
wherex,x′ denote arbitrary basis functions and the decomposition of the neural network trial wave
function|Ψ⟩ onto the computational basis is given by|Ψ⟩  = ∑x|x⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩.  The decomposition
coefﬁcients Ψ(x′) =⟨x|Ψ⟩ are generally multidimensional integrals and were estimated using Rie-
mann approximations (Riemann approximations rely on batch computations, i.e., they require wave
function values computed over the entire domain which must be ﬁnite). The expectation value of the
Hamiltonian⟨x|H|x′⟩ computed for two arbitrary basis functions givesHxx′. The computational
basis in our experiments was chosen such that calculatingHxx′ was feasible analytically or computa-
tionally. In the experiments we show that despite the computational basis possibly being inﬁnite, we
can recover accurate solutions using its ﬁnite subset.

4    Experiments

DNN was trained in an unsupervised setting to approximate the ground state wave function for
physical systems given below. We consider the unperturbed and perturbed particle in a box systems
since they have known solutions that we can compare our results with.  These systems consist of
a single one dimensional particle in a real space and therefore the input of the DNN is a scalar
value representing the position of the particle in its domain.   The output of the network is the
approximated value of the ground state wave function. The parameters of the DNN were optimized
using batch gradient descent and automatic differentiation tools were used to compute gradients for
backpropagation. This was implemented using Pytorch.
The ﬁrst N∈ Z+ (a hyperparameter of the framework) eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian of the
particle in a box systems were used as the computational basis. Real valued functions were used for
|Ψ⟩, but we emphasize that the framework described in this paper would be identical when using
complex functions for|Ψ⟩ instead.

4.1    A particle in a box
A particle in a box consists of a free particle constrained to a domainx∈{0,a} :a∈ R by inﬁnite
potential outside its domain, i.e., inﬁnite potential well:{0     0<x<a

                                            V (x) =      ∞    otherwise                                                        (3)
wherea is the well width. The Hamiltonian of this system isH =− ℏ2                      d2
                                                                                    2µ dx2 , whereµ is the particle
mass and ℏ is the Planck constant. Its eigenvalues areEn = n2π2ℏ22µa2   and its eigenbasis is:
                                             {√
                                                   2
                                      bn =         a sin (nπa x)    0<x<a
                                                0                         otherwise                                                (4)
wheren∈ Z+ indicates thenth stationary state. We used the ﬁrstN eigenfunctions of this system as
the computational basis and computed matrixHnm (m also indicates an arbitrary stationary state) as


                                                           3
follows:Hnm =δnmEn =δnmn2π2ℏ22µa2  . Thus ﬁnally, the objective function in this experiment is:
                                                      ∑
                                            ⟨H⟩ =        ∑n|⟨bn|Ψ⟩|2Hnn

                                                            n|⟨bn|Ψ⟩|2                                                          (5)

4.2    A particle in a box with a linear perturbation
For this experiment a linear potentialV (x) = αx, whereα∈ R, was added to the inﬁnite square
well potential of the particle in a box system. The Hamiltonian of this system isH =H0 +H′ =
− ℏ2   d2
  2µ  dx2 +αx, whereH0 is the Hamiltonian of the unperturbed particle in the box system andH′
is the perturbation. The objective function in this experiment was the expectation of the perturbed
Hamiltonian given by
                                               ⟨H⟩ =⟨H0⟩ +⟨H′⟩,                                                          (6)
due to the linearity of the expectation (this property was also used to compute the matrixHnm for
this experiment). The expectation value of the perturbation is given by:∑
                 ⟨H′⟩ =α⟨x⟩ =α             n|⟨bn|Ψ⟩|2xloc(bn)∑                           xnm⟨bm|Ψ⟩
                                                n|⟨bn|Ψ⟩|2   , xloc(bn) =∑m                    ⟨bn|Ψ⟩                   (7)
The  expectation  value  of  the  position  operator  in  the  computational  basis xnm  was  computed
analytically:                     {a
                        xnm =        2                         n =m[ cos ((n−m)π)−1]
                                     a                                                 n⁄=m.                           (8)
                                    π2        (n−m)2  −  cos ((n+m)π)−1(n+m)2

4.3    Results
In our experiment for the unperturbed
system (well widtha=1) we used a
DNN with 1 hidden layer of width
1000 and ReLU activation functions.
For the experiments with perturbed
systems (ﬁrst considered system, sys-
tem A, had well width a  =  1 and              Figure 1: Normalized ground state wave functions. Results
perturbation constantα = 8 and the             (solid line) for the unperturbed system (a), perturbed system
second one, system B, had well width           A (b), and perturbed system B (c) are compared to the exact
a  =  10  and  perturbation  constant          results (dashed line).
α  =  2) we used DNNs with 2 hid-
den layers of width 500 and 100 and ReLU activation functions.  For all experiments presented
N = 100 basis functions were used. The normalized ground state wave function found by our neural
networks is compared to the exact wave function in Figure 1. In Table 1 the ground state energies (in
natural units) of each system are compared to the exact values as well as the values obtained using the
VMC method of [15]. The exact values were obtained by solving TISE using a symbolic differential
equation solver, i.e., Mathematica.
Note that the ground state wave functions                             Table 1: Ground state energies
obtained with our DNN model are practi-                                                     Eground state
cally identical to the analytically obtained              System             Computed     VMC [15]     Exact
target wave functions (Figure 1). Moreover,
as can be observed in Table 1, the proposed               Unperturbed     4.93484        4.9348           4.93480
approach ﬁnds highly accurate approxima-                  Perturbed A      8.79510        8.7960           8.79507
tions of the ground state solutions, which are            Perturbed B      2.94583        NA                2.94583
also comparable or better than the approxi-
mations obtained with the VMC method of [15]. We also accurately approximated system (perturbed
system B) that corresponds to a more complicated wave function that was not analyzed in [15] The
obtained preliminary experiments conﬁrm the plausibility of using DNNs to represent the trial wave
function and effectiveness of the proposed variational method.  Such approach can be especially
useful in case of systems where there exist a limited prior knowledge to motivate a speciﬁc choice of
the trial wave function. In future works we will generalize our approach to approximate the solution
of TISE for more complex physical systems [8, 12].

                                                            4
5    Conclusion

In this manuscript a new framework for approximating the ground state solution of the physical
system described by a given Hamiltonian is presented. It is based on using a deep neural network to
represent a trial wave function in a variational optimization scheme via an end-to-end deep learning
framework.  The DNN is trained by minimizing the expectation value of the Hamiltonian.  Initial
experimental results on particle in a box physical systems are presented and conﬁrm the validity of
the proposed approach.

References
 [1]  David J. Grifﬁths and Darrell F. Schroeter.  Introduction to Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge
      University Press, 3 edition, 2018.
 [2]  P. A. M. Dirac.  The Principles of Quantum Mechanics.  Oxford University Press, 4 edition,
      1967.
 [3]John R. Taylor.      Classical Mechanics. University Science Book, 2005.
 [4]  Max Born.  Zur quantenmechanik der stoßvorgänge.  Zeitschrift für Physik, 37(12):863–867,
      1926.
 [5]  L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz.  The Classical Theory of Fields.  Butterworth-Heinemann, 4
      edition, 1980.
 [6]Lucjan Piela.      Ideas of Quantum Chemistry. Elsevier, 3 edition, 2020.
 [7]  Franck Laloë. Do We Really Understand Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge University Press, 2
      edition, 2019.
 [8]  Jan Hermann, Zeno Schätzle, and Frank Noé. Deep neural network solution of the electronic
      schrödinger equation, 2020.
 [9]  Giuseppe Carleo and Troyer Matthias. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial
      neural networks. Science, 355(602), 2017.
[10]Fritz Coester. Bound stats of a many-particle system.        Nuclear Physics, 7:421–424, 1958.
[11]  M. A. Morales, J. McMinis, B. K. Clark, J. Kim, and G. E. Scuseria. Multideterminant wave
      functions in quantum monte carlo. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 8(7), 2012.
[12]  Jiequn Han, Linfeng Zhang, and Weinan E. Solving many-electron schrödinger equation using
      deep neural networks. Journal of Computational Physics, 399(108929), 2019.
[13]  David Pfau, James S. Spencer, Alexander G. D. G. Matthews, and W. M. C. Foulkes.  Ab
      initio solution of the many-electron schrödinger equation with deep neural networks. Phys. Rev.
      Research, 2(033429), 2020.
[14]  Deep neural network solution of the electronic Schrödinger equation. https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=_bdvpmleAgw&feature=youtu.be, 2020.
[15]  Teng Peiyuan. Machine learning quantum mechanics: solving quantum mechanics problems
      using radial basis function network. Phys. Rev. E, 98(033305), 2018.
[16]  Jeongnim Kim et al. QMCPACK: an open source ab initio quantum monte carlo package for
      the electronic structure of atoms, molecules and solids. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter,
      30(19), 2018.
[17]  Tao Pang. An Introduction to Quantum Monte Carlo Methods. Morgan & Claypool Publishers,
      2016.
[18]  Federico Becca and Sandro Sorella. Quantum Monte Carlo Approaches for Correlated Systems.
      Cambridge University Press, 2017.









                                                          5