Group Convolutional Neural Networks Improve Quantum State Accuracy
Christopher Roth and Allan H. MacDonald
Physics Department, University of Texas at Austin
Neural networks are a promising tool for simulating quantum many body systems. Recently,
it has been shown that neural network-based models describe quantum many body systems more
accurately when they are constrained to have the correct symmetry properties. In this paper,
we show how to create maximally expressive models for quantum states with speciﬁc symmetry
properties by drawing on literature from the machine learning community. We implement group
equivariant convolutional networks (G-CNN) [1], and demonstrate that performance improvements
can be achieved without increasing memory use. We show that G-CNNs achieve very good accuracy
for Heisenberg quantum spin models in both ordered and spin liquid regimes, and improve the
ground state accuracy on the triangular lattice over other variational Monte-Carlo methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Because quantum physics problems with interacting
degrees of freedom grow exponentially with the number
of degrees of freedom, accurate numerical solutions are of-
ten available only for relatively small system sizes. Sim-
ulations nevertheless play a valuable role in advancing
understanding because they have the important advan-
tages over experiments on real physical systems that the
problem being solved is fully characterized and free from
unintended disorder. Neural network quantum states
(NQS) ([2–9]) have emerged as a competitive tool for
understanding the low temperature properties of quan-
tum many-body physics models. Unlike traditional vari-
ational Monte-Carlo (VMC) methods, such as Gutzwiller
projection, neural networks have the advantage, and also
the disadvantage, of being free from inductive biases
about the structure of the solution. They compensate
for the absence of an informed bias by using an enor-
mous number of parameters. As long as a wide enough
model is used, neural networks contain arbitrarily accu-
rate solutions [10].
Although reasonably large neural networks are guar-
anteed to harbor good solutions in the space of possible
parameters, there is no guarantee that these solutions
can be found in a reasonable time. One way to acceler-
ate training is to constrain the search space by removing
non-solutions. This is especially useful on lattice prob-
lems which have highly symmetric low-lying energy lev-
els. Recent research [7, 11–15] has shown that forcing
neural networks to have the correct symmetry tremen-
dously improves their ability to model the ground state
and low-lying excited states of quantum many-body sys-
tems.
Other research in the ﬁeld of NQS has focused on
training deeper models, speciﬁcally convolutional neural
networks (CNN) [8, 11, 16]. This is motivated by the
ﬁeld of computer vision [17, 18], in which deep convolu-
tional neural networks have excelled at pattern recogni-
tion. While both images and quantum ground states of-
ten have translational symmetry, quantum ground states
frequently have additional point group symmetry. In this
paper we leverage literature from the machine learning
community [1] to generalize convolutional NQS to the full
wallpaper group of highly symmetric lattices.
We show that group equivariant convolutional net-
works (G-CNN) [1] provide the most expressive
perceptron-like model for wavefunctions with particular
symmetry over discrete groups. G-CNNs are constructed
using equivariant convolutions, which are the most com-
plex linear operations that preserve the structure of a
discrete symmetry group [1]. This approach contrasts
with previous research [7, 11, 12], which has utilized
a symmetry-averaging procedure in which the model is
applied to symmetry-transformations of the input and
the output is averaged. We show that G-CNNs can be
mapped to symmetry-averaged linear models by zeroing
out some ﬁlters between hidden layers. When we mask
a G-CNN in this manner, i.e. when we constrain it to
match previous symmetry-averaging procedures, the per-
formance degrades.
We use a G-CNN with local translational ﬁlters to sim-
ulate frustrated J1− J2 Heisenberg models on square
and triangular lattices. Both of these Hamiltonians give
rise to rich phase diagrams that include magnetically or-
dered states and spin liquid states that do not order but
have non-trivial quantum entanglement. Our model gives
accurate results for both triangular and square lattice
phase-diagrams, and compares favorably with state-of-
the-art variational Monte-Carlo (VMC) results on the
triangular lattice.
II. VMC WITH NEURAL NETWORK
QUANTUM STATES
We compute ground state energies for the frustrated
J1−J2 Heisenberg model on the square and triangular
lattices. The Hamiltonian is given by:
H =J1
∑
i,j∈⟨⟩
σi·σj +J2
∑
i,j∈⟨⟨⟩⟩
σi·σj, (1)
where⟨⟩ and⟨⟨⟩⟩ are nearest and next-nearest neighbor
links and J1,J 2 > 0. We use a neural-network ansatz
that associates a complex number ψ(σ) with each conﬁg-
arXiv:2104.05085v3  [quant-ph]  28 May 2021
2
uration of spins σ. These deﬁne the wavefunction:
|ψ >=
∑
σ
ψ(σ)|σ >. (2)
We optimize our Ansatz using gradient based methods
as detailed in Carleo et al. [2].
III. SYMMETRIC NEURAL NETWORK
WAVEFUNCTIONS
Symmetry-averaging neural networks has been shown
to improve performance in both machine learning appli-
cations [1, 19–22] and quantum many-body VMC appli-
cations [12, 23, 24]. Below, we ﬁrst discuss symmetry-
averaging from the point of view of equivariance. We
then show that that G-CNNs provide a richer model
class, which can be mapped down to symmetry-averaged
models by masking ﬁlters.
A. The Principle of Equivariance
An equivariant function acts on a G-space [1, 25], a set
of objects, S, that are related by the symmetry transfor-
mations of a group, G. In this paper we consider the
set of transformations, generated by lattice translations
and the d4(6) point group for square (triangular) lattices.
These are the groups of transformations that leave the
lattices unchanged. An equivariant function is one that
transforms a G-set of poses while preserving the group
structure,
g′F({f}S) =F(g{f}S), (3)
where{f}S is a set of features over the set S. Here g′
and g do not be the same operator, but they must be
generators of isomorphic groups. For example if g =Tx,y
is a translation on a periodic 2D square lattice of length
L, then g′ = Tx′,y′ must also be a translation that is
cyclic over L in both dimensions.
B. Symmetry-Averaged Models are Equivariant
Models
Symmetry can be imposed [24] on a model wavefunc-
tion ψ by a symmetry-averaging procedure that applies
the model to all symmetry-transformations of the input
and performs a phase-factor weighted average over out-
puts:
ψ(σ) =
∑
g
χg ˜ψ(g−1σ). (4)
Here χg is the character of symmetry operation g, and
g−1 is the inverse of g, which means that gg−1 =g−1g =
I. This procedure can also be thought of as averaging
over the output of an equivariant model ψg(σ) if we de-
ﬁne:
ψg(σ) = ˜ψ(g−1σ). (5)
This deﬁnition recasts a single model ˜ψ applied to NG
inputs, as an equivariant model ψg with output dimen-
sionNG applied to a single input. Note that a symmetry
transformation on the input to ψg yields a symmetry op-
eration on the output:
ψg(u−1σ) = ˜ψ(g−1u−1σ). =ψug(σ). (6)
We see that is still equivariant, as the set of transforma-
tions{u} and{u−1} form isomorphic groups. Using this
new deﬁnition, the symmetrization procedure expresses
the wavefunction as follows:
ψ(σ) =
∑
g
χgψg(σ). (7)
This still produces a ψ that has the desired character:
ψ(uσ) =
∑
g
χgψg(uσ) =
∑
g
χgψu−1g(σ)
=
∑
g
χugψg(σ) =
∑
g
χuχgψg(σ) =χuψ(σ).
(8)
From this discussion we see that symmetry-averaging
is not required to restrict symmetry eigenvalues. Only
equivariance is needed. In this paper, we replace the
symmetry averaging procedure by a G-CNN, which con-
sists of stacked equivarant convolutional layers [1] inter-
spersed with non-linearities. The G-CNN architecture
allows us to scale up the number of parameters without
using more memory, and improves performance on diﬃ-
cult optimization problems.
C. Generalizing Translational Convolutions to
Discrete Groups
Equivariance under the translational group is present
in standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
Ci
x,y =
∑
x′,y′<L
Wi
x′−x,y′−y· fx′,y′, (9)
that satisfy periodic boundary conditions. The ﬁlters
Wi
x′−x,y′−y, look at patterns in the feature map fx′,y′
separated fromx,y by{x′−x,y′−y}. CNNs work by al-
ternating convolution operations with non-linearities to
develop increasingly abstract representations of the in-
put.
The G-CNN generalizes the CNN to act over a discrete
groupG, which may contain non-commuting operations.
For our implementation, we consider the full wallpaper
group, which adds rotation and mirror symmetry on top
of translation. The group convolution operation is writ-
ten as follows:
Ci
g =
∑
h∈G
Wi
g−1h· fh. (10)
3
(a)
 (b)
FIG. 1: Schematic of an equivariant convolutional model on a triangular lattice with p6m symmetry. Nearest
neighbor convolutions are drawn for legibility. a) Equivariant convolution connecting the input to the feature maps.
Each feature map uses a set of ﬁlters with a speciﬁed symmetry transformation over d6. (b) Equivariant convolution
connecting feature maps at adjacent layers. There are 12 sets of ﬁlters that connect poses based on their relative
orientations.
For the G-CNN, the feature map is deﬁned over the G-
space generated by the wallpaper group, instead of just
the translation group. We see that the group convolution
is equivariant, since a group operation on input yields the
same group operation on the output:
∑
h∈G
Wi
g−1h· fuh =
∑
h∈G
Wi
g−1u−1h· fh =Ci
ug. (11)
This linear operation is the building block of our model.
D. Our Model
We use a model that is similar to a G-CNN [1], and
speciﬁed by a stack of equivariant convolutional layers in-
terspersed with pointwise non-linearities. The ﬁrst con-
volution takes the z-components of the spins, σx, where
x are the lattice site labels, and outputs a feature map
over the full wallpaper group:
f 1
g = Γ
(∑
x
W 0
g−1xσx
)
, (12)
where Γ is a point-wise non-linearity. This convolution
is diagrammed in Fig. 1a. The feature-to-feature convo-
lutions are performed as in equation 10:
fi+1
g = Γ
(∑
h∈G
Wi
g−1hfi
h
)
. (13)
The structure of these convolutions is seen in Fig. 1b. We
compute our wavefunction with character{χg} by phase-
weighting over the exponential our ﬁnal embedding, fN
g ,
which has length one:
ψ(σ) =
∑
g
χg−1exp(fN
g ). (14)
We choose Γ to be the SELU nonlinearity [26] applied
separately to the real and imaginary parts,
Γ(x) = SELU(Re(x)) +iSELU(Im(x)). (15)
The SELU nonlineariity moves the distribution of acti-
vations in the direction of zero mean and one variance,
which enables stable training of deep networks. We note
that for all models studied in this paper, the ground state
is fully symmetric, i.e. χg = 1 for all g.
While this model may appear complicated, we believe
it is actually quite simple. It is just a multi-layer per-
ceptron, with alternating linear and pointwise non-linear
transformations, in which weights are tied together to
4
(a)
 (b)
FIG. 2: Filter shapes for our restricted equivariant convolution operation on the a) triangular lattice (b) square
lattice. For both lattices, interactions are restricted to third nearest neighbors.
force particular symmetry properties. Training a simple
model, with a constant feature dimension and with nei-
ther bells nor whistles, will demonstrate the power of this
approach.
IV. RESULTS
We begin by showing results from our best performing
model, which uses a G-CNN architecture with local ﬁl-
ters. This model achieves state-of-the-art VMC ground
state energies on the triangular lattice, and competitive
energies on the square lattice. We then examine how
the perfomance of the G-CNN is aﬀected by masking
oﬀ-diagonal ﬁlters. As detailed in section VIII B, this
simpliﬁcation maps G-CNNs to models that are forced
to be equivariant by symmetry-averaging. The optimiza-
tion details for both of these experiments are outlined in
section VIII E.
A. Results from our Best Performing Model
In Table I we summarize a variety of ground state
energy estimates obtained using diﬀerent methods for
6×6 ﬁnite-size J1,J 2 triangular lattice Heisenberg mod-
els. For this lattice size, the DMRG[27] and and ED[28]
estimates agree to ﬁve ﬁgures and are essentially exact.
For the J2 = 0 case our model achieves ∼ 0.2% accu-
racy for the energy, compared to the ∼ 1% accuracy
achieved by other variational methods in the literature.
ForJ2 =J1/8, in the spin-liquid regime, the ground state
energy error is reduced by a factor of ∼ 3 compared to
literature VMC estimates. VMC calculations often add
Lanczos steps [29] to improve variational energy accura-
cies; our ground state energies surpasses all other VMC
methods in accuracy even without this elaboration.
J2 = 0 J2 = J1/8
ED [28] -0.5603734 -0.515564
DMRG [27] -0.560375 -0.51557
G-CNN -0.55922 -0.51365
NN + Gutzwiller [12] -0.553 N/A
VMC + 2LS [27] N/A -0.512503
VMC [30] -0.55519 -0.5089
VMC [31] -0.55420 N/A
VMC [27] -0.548025 -0.501788
TABLE I: Comparison between ﬁnite size 6× 6
triangular lattice ground state energies estimates
We studied the dependence of performance, measured
by the accuracy of ground state energy estimates, on the
range of the ﬁlter for J2 =J1/8. Restricting the connec-
tivity reduces computational overhead, and biases the
model towards learning short range interactions. Chang-
ing the ﬁlter shape changes the way in which the model
conveys information about the connectivity of the lat-
tice. We tried a few diﬀerent symmetric ﬁlter shapes and
settled on a version that convolves over third-nearest-
neighbors, as shown in Fig. 2.
In order to demonstrate the robustness of our model,
we applied the same architecture to the ordered and spin
liquid regimes of the square lattice J1−J2 Heisenberg
model. Remarkably, across all four domains, we only
had to adjust a single learning rate. The results on the
square lattice are summarized in Table II
We make a direct comparison to the square lattice
CNN model described in Choo et al. [11] who use a
5
FIG. 3: Performance of the G-CNN on the triangular Heisenberg model ( J2 = 1
8) as various oﬀ-diagonal ﬁlters are
set to zero. As described in section VIII B this is equivalent to replacing group convolution with symmetry
averaging. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3 × 10−3
G-CNN CNN + c4 RBM + PP
J2 = J1/2 0.17% 0.39% 0.022%
J2 = 0 0.016% 0.007% N/A
Max Memory 16 × Ng 10 × Ng 576 × Ng
Nparams 113360 3838 22032
TABLE II: Errors relative to exact diagnalization for
6× 6 square-lattice ﬁnite-size ground state states. The
number of variational parameters and the memory
usage are compared for diﬀerent approaches.
translationally equivariant CNN symmetry-averaged over
c4, while we use a model that is equivariant over the
full space group p4m. As explained in section VIII B of
the appendix, their model can be mapped to a G-CNN
overp4 with masked oﬀ-diagonal rotational ﬁlters. Our
model uses slightly more memory, while their model has
more layers and uses an improved optimizer. We see that
the G-CNN model nevertheless has better ground state
energy accuracy on the diﬃcult-to-simulate spin-liquid
state. Neither CNN architecture is competetive with the
architecture detailed by Nomura et al. [7], who combine a
restricted Boltzmann machine with a pair product state
(RBM+PP). Theirs is a shallower model that uses far
more memory. For the ordered state, both CNN based
methods are very accurate, and the discrepancy may be
due to convergence issues [32] with the adaptive moment
(Adam) parameter optimizer [33].
We note that the equivariant model has by far the best
parameter-number to memory ratio, as it adds connec-
tivity along the entire d4 symmetry group. Maximizing
the number of parameters in a memory proﬁle [34, 35]
is important for performance improvement on massively
parallel modern hardware. Even though our model has
more parameters than the RBM + PP model, it is likely
much faster to train on a GPU.
B. Eﬀect of Oﬀ-Diagonal Filters
We document the importance of full connectivity us-
ing the J1−J2 Heisenberg model on a triangular lattice
with J2 = J1/8. This is a diﬃcult system to simulate
6
since it gives rise to a spin liquid state with no mag-
netic order and non-trivial entanglement. We train four
models with diﬀerent feature-to-feature connectivities to
test the eﬀect of replacing layer-wise equivariance with
symmetry averaging. We do this by applying a mask-
ing procedure, where we set oﬀ-diagonal ﬁlters to zero.
Here, the term oﬀ-diagonal distinguishes between ﬁlters
that connect poses of the same orientation in a partic-
ular symmetry group and ﬁlters that connect diﬀerent
orientations. As an example, ﬁlters in equation 9 with
{x′,y′} ={x,y} are translationally diagonal whereas all
others are translationally oﬀ-diagonal.
First we train a model with diagonal feature-to-feature
interactions along all groups, corresponding to a fully
connected linear model symmetrized over p6m. Second
we train models with oﬀ-diagonal features in translation
and rotation set to zero. These correspond to models that
convolve over some degrees of freedom, and symmetry
average over others. Finally, we compare all of these
with a G-CNN with full connectivity. While all four of
these models use the same amount of memory, they have
vastly diﬀerent numbers of parameters.
Connectivity Full Translational d6 Diagonal
Nparams 449856 38016 13056 1616
TABLE III: Comparison between the number of
parameters of diﬀerent equivariant architectures
We see in Fig. 3 that adding a richer layer structure
systematically improves the performance. The model
with fully-connected layers markedly outperforms the
others, surpassing their performance in 1/10 of the train-
ing time. We also see in Fig. 3 that the energy estimates
are not monotonic functions of training time. This be-
havior is related to our use of high learning rates that en-
able escapes from local minima. Although higher learn-
ing rates worsen the performance temporarily, we ﬁnd
that the ﬁnal variational energies are ultimately supe-
rior.
We see that translational ﬁlters have a bigger eﬀect on
performance than rotational ﬁlters. This could simply be
due to the number of parameters in the models. On a
6× 6 lattice, adding translational interactions increases
the number of parameters by a factor of 36, while adding
d6 interactions only increases the number of parameters
by a factor of 12.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper we use a G-CNN to ﬁnd the ground wave-
function of the frustrated Heisenberg model on the square
and triangular lattices. We ﬁnd that the G-CNN ar-
chitecture yields accurate ground state energies for both
magnetically ordered states and spin liquids, including
the most accurate VMC energies on the triangular lat-
tice to date.
Among perceptron-like models, G-CNN models are
more expressive than symmetry-averaged models. We
explicitly demonstrate how performance degrades as the
model class is constrained. For the wallpaper groupp6m,
we see that it is important to convolve over both trans-
lation operations and the point group.
For our experiments we used the simplest kind of
neural network model that satisﬁes the symmetry con-
straints, a multi-layer perceptron with tied weights. We
note that other advances in machine learning, such as
depthwise convolutions [36] and attention [37], can also
be implemented with group equivariance [38]. Imple-
menting these models could certainly further improve the
performance of the quantum spin model ground state cal-
culations we have discussed, and other quantum ground
state calclations. Although we only studied relatively
small systems, these calculations could be scaled to larger
systems by combining sparsiﬁcation, transfer learning,
and eﬃcient sampling [39].
Finally, we note that several other papers have stud-
ied the importance of using equivariant models applied
to diﬀerent symmetry groups. Luo et al. [14] show that
gauge equivarant neural networks improve performance
on gauge invariant Hamiltonians [13], and Pfau et al [40]
use a permutation equivariant model to account for iden-
tical electrons. Since many important physics models
have substantial symmetry, applications of equivariant
models are likely to be important for machine-learning
methods in computational physics.
VI. CODE
Code for implementing G-CNNs on NQS will be made
publically available through NetKet [41] in the near fu-
ture. Pytorch code for these experiments will be up-
loaded at https://github.com/chrisrothUT/
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Chris Roth acknowledges helpful interactions with Mo-
hamed Hibat-Allah, Juan Carrasquilla and Giuseppe
Carleo. This work was supported in part by the Army
Research Oﬃce (ARO) Grant # W911NF-17-1-0312
(MURI).
VIII. APPENDIX
A. Implementation of the Equivariant Convolution
We implement our equivariant convolution exactly as
in Cohen et al. [1]. We learn an index mapping that
relates our ﬁlters of shape [din,dout,Ng] to a group of 2D
convolutions with rotated ﬁlters as depicted in 1b. Then
we concatenate the rotation/reﬂection with the channel
7
dimension and apply a 2D convolution. For details see
the aforementioned paper.
B. Equivariant Models can be Mapped to other
Symmetrized models by Constraining Filters
Recently several groups [7, 8, 11, 12, 42] have accu-
rately simulated the frustratedJ1−J2 Heisenberg model
on a square lattice by constraining the symmetry eigen-
values. While some of these models used translational
convolutions, none of them convolved over the entire wall-
paper group p4m as done by the G-CNN.
We demonstrate how the G-CNN can be mapped down
to other multi-layer linear models by masking ﬁlters. For
the sake a brevity, we show the mapping between the
p4m G-CNN and a) a linear model symmetry-averaged
over p4m b) a translationally equivariant model symme-
try averaged over d4.
We construct a symmetry operation in p4m by ﬁrst
applying a reﬂection, followed by a rotation and a trans-
lation,
Sx,y,α,β =TxyRαRm
β. (16)
Using equation 10, we can write the ﬁlter that connects
two G-set elements in neighboring layers.
S−1
x,y,α,βSx′,y′,α′,β′ =Rm
−βR−αTx′−x,y′−yRα′Rm
β′. (17)
This is a convolution operation with ﬁlters transformed
byp4m as shown in Fig. 1b.
To map to a multi-layer linear model symmetry-
averaged over p4m, the input-to-feature ﬁlters are kept
the same and the feature-to-feature ﬁlters are restricted
to be diagonal, α =α′, β =β′, x =x′ and y =y′.
The new feature-to-feature convolution becomes
fi+1
x,y,α,β =σ
(
Wifi
x,y,α,β
)
. (18)
This is equivalent to applying the same linear model to
each pose. The diﬀerent poses are generated by the sym-
metry transformed ﬁlters shown in Fig. 1a. Equivalently,
we could generate the poses by symmetry transforming
the input and keeping the ﬁlters the same. As a result,
we see that the G-CNN with diagonal feature-to-feature
ﬁlters is equivalent to a linear model symmetrized over
p4m.
We can also map the G-CNN to a translationally equiv-
ariant model (CNN) symmetrized over d4 by constraining
α =α′ and β =β′. With this constraint the feature-to-
feature convolution is
fi+1
x,y,α,β =
∑
x′,y′
σ
(
Wi
x′−x,y′−y,α,β fi
x′,y′,α,β
)
. (19)
The feature-to-feature convolution now consists of CNNs
applied to each pose in d4 labeled by α,β where the ﬁl-
ters of each CNN are transformed according to the group
element
Wi
x′−x,y′−y,α,β =Rm
−βR−αWi
x′−x,y′−yRαRm
β (20)
Again, if we change basis and transform the input instead
of the ﬁlters, this is a CNN symmetrized overd4. Both of
these examples show that symmetry-averaging creates a
more restrictive model class than the G-CNN for multi-
layer networks.
C. Triangular Heisenberg on a Rectangular Grid
We implement the triangular Heisenberg model on a
rectangular graph by noting that a triangular graph is
isometric to a rectangular graph with coupling along one
of the diagonals. We implement our models on 6 × 6
tori with periodic boundary conditions (PBCs) and cou-
pling along one of the diagonals. This is equivalent to a
hexagonal shaped lattice with 36 sites.
D. Coordinate Mappings
On the square lattice, a π
2 rotation is deﬁned by the
coordinate mapping ( i,j ) → (−j,i ) where the coordi-
nates are deﬁned modulo L. On the triangular lattice
a π
3 mapping is accomplished by a coordinate mapping
(i,j )→ (i−j,i ). We can arbitrarily choose a reﬂection
axis, and for simplicity we do the coordinate transform
(i,j )→ (j,i ) for both geometries.
E. Optimization Details
Our best performing model had 4 layers and 16 hid-
den nodes. We used the Adam optimizer [33] with a
learning rate of 3 × 10−3 and the default parameters.
We optimized our learning rate and network architecture
on the triangular lattice with J2 = 0.125 and used the
same hyperparameters for the other systems, except for
the square lattice with J2 = 0 where we found that the
learning rate was too high, and decreased it by a factor
of 3.
Our optimization procedure was as follows. First, we
optimized the phase structure for 500 steps by setting
Re(log(ψ)) = 0 before outputting ψ. We found that
pre-optimizing the phases [42], which helps avoid local-
minima, was crucial to successfully ﬁnding the ground
state. We then trained both amplitudes and phases for
104 steps at batch size 100 before increasing the batch
size to 1000 and training for an additional 2 × 103 steps.
We tuned the learning rate (on the triangular lattice at
J2 = 1
8) by altering it by factors of 3 and modiﬁed Nhidden
and Nlayers under the constraint Nhidden×Nlayers = 64
We found that a ratio of Nhidden
Nlayers
= 4 worked best.
8
[1] Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant con-
volutional networks. In International conference on ma-
chine learning, pages 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016.
[2] Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer. Solving the quan-
tum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural networks.
Science, 355(6325):602–606, 2017.
[3] Juan Carrasquilla. Machine learning for quantum matter.
Advances in Physics: X , 5(1):1797528, 2020.
[4] Or Sharir, Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Giuseppe Carleo,
and Amnon Shashua. Deep autoregressive models for the
eﬃcient variational simulation of many-body quantum
systems. Physical review letters, 124(2):020503, 2020.
[5] Mohamed Hibat-Allah, Martin Ganahl, Lauren E Hay-
ward, Roger G Melko, and Juan Carrasquilla. Recur-
rent neural network wave functions. Physical Review Re-
search, 2(2):023358, 2020.
[6] Christopher Roth. Iterative retraining of quantum spin
models using recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.06228, 2020.
[7] Yusuke Nomura and Masatoshi Imada. Dirac-type nodal
spin liquid revealed by machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14142, 2020.
[8] Xiao Liang, Shao-Jun Dong, and Lixin He. Hybrid con-
volutional neural network and projected entangled pair
states wave functions for quantum many-particle states.
Physical Review B, 103(3):035138, 2021.
[9] Nikita Astrakhantsev, Tom Westerhout, Apoorv Tiwari,
Kenny Choo, Ao Chen, Mark H Fischer, Giuseppe Car-
leo, and Titus Neupert. Broken-symmetry ground states
of the heisenberg model on the pyrochlore lattice. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.08787, 2021.
[10] Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White.
Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approxi-
mators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
[11] Kenny Choo, Titus Neupert, and Giuseppe Carleo. Two-
dimensional frustrated j 1- j 2 model studied with
neural network quantum states. Physical Review B ,
100(12):125124, 2019.
[12] Francesco Ferrari, Federico Becca, and Juan Car-
rasquilla. Neural gutzwiller-projected variational wave
functions. Physical Review B, 100(12):125131, 2019.
[13] Di Luo, Zhuo Chen, Kaiwen Hu, Zhizhen Zhao,
Vera Mikyoung Hur, and Bryan K Clark. Gauge invari-
ant autoregressive neural networks for quantum lattice
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07243 , 2021.
[14] Di Luo, Giuseppe Carleo, Bryan K Clark, and James
Stokes. Gauge equivariant neural networks for quantum
lattice gauge theories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05232 ,
2020.
[15] Tom Vieijra, Corneel Casert, Jannes Nys, Wesley
De Neve, Jutho Haegeman, Jan Ryckebusch, and Frank
Verstraete. Restricted boltzmann machines for quantum
states with non-abelian or anyonic symmetries. Physical
review letters, 124(9):097201, 2020.
[16] Peter Broecker, Juan Carrasquilla, Roger G Melko, and
Simon Trebst. Machine learning quantum phases of mat-
ter beyond the fermion sign problem. Scientiﬁc reports,
7(1):1–10, 2017.
[17] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[18] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioﬀe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and
Alexander Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the
impact of residual connections on learning. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
volume 31, 2017.
[19] Taco Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and
Max Welling. Gauge equivariant convolutional networks
and the icosahedral cnn. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 2019.
[20] Sander Dieleman, Jeﬀrey De Fauw, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. Exploiting cyclic symmetry in convolu-
tional neural networks. In International conference on
machine learning, pages 1889–1898. PMLR, 2016.
[21] Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas K¨ ohler, and
Max Welling. Spherical cnns. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.10130, 2018.
[22] Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh,
Barnabas Poczos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Alexan-
der Smola. Deep sets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06114 ,
2017.
[23] Kenny Choo, Giuseppe Carleo, Nicolas Regnault, and
Titus Neupert. Symmetries and many-body excitations
with neural-network quantum states. Physical review let-
ters, 121(16):167204, 2018.
[24] Yusuke Nomura. Helping restricted boltzmann machine
with quantum-state representation by restoring symme-
try. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14777 , 2020.
[25] Andrew M Pitts. Nominal sets: Names and symmetry
in computer science , volume 57. Cambridge University
Press, 2013.
[26] G¨ unter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr,
and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02515 , 2017.
[27] Yasir Iqbal, Wen-Jun Hu, Ronny Thomale, Didier Poil-
blanc, and Federico Becca. Spin liquid nature in the
heisenberg j 1- j 2 triangular antiferromagnet. Physical
Review B, 93(14):144411, 2016.
[28] B Bernu, P Lecheminant, C Lhuillier, and L Pierre. Exact
spectra, spin susceptibilities, and order parameter of the
quantum heisenberg antiferromagnet on the triangular
lattice. Physical Review B, 50(14):10048, 1994.
[29] Sandro Sorella. Generalized lanczos algorithm for vari-
ational quantum monte carlo. Physical Review B ,
64(2):024512, 2001.
[30] Ryui Kaneko, Satoshi Morita, and Masatoshi Imada.
Gapless spin-liquid phase in an extended spin 1/2 trian-
gular heisenberg model. Journal of the Physical Society
of Japan, 83(9):093707, 2014.
[31] Fabio Mezzacapo and J Ignacio Cirac. Ground-
state properties of the spin-antiferromagnetic heisenberg
model on the triangular lattice: a variational study based
on entangled-plaquette states. New Journal of Physics ,
12(10):103039, 2010.
[32] Sashank J Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On
the convergence of adam and beyond. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09237, 2019.
[33] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014.
[34] Nikita Kitaev,  Lukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya.
9
Reformer: The eﬃcient transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.04451, 2020.
[35] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch
transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models
with simple and eﬃcient sparsity. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.03961, 2021.
[36] Fran¸ cois Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depth-
wise separable convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 1251–1258, 2017.
[37] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.03762, 2017.
[38] David Romero, Erik Bekkers, Jakub Tomczak, and Mark
Hoogendoorn. Attentive group equivariant convolu-
tional networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 8188–8199. PMLR, 2020.
[39] Li Yang, Wenjun Hu, and Li Li. Scalable variational
monte carlo with graph neural ansatz. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.12453, 2020.
[40] David Pfau, James S Spencer, Alexander GDG
Matthews, and W Matthew C Foulkes. Ab initio solu-
tion of the many-electron schr¨ odinger equation with deep
neural networks. Physical Review Research, 2(3):033429,
2020.
[41] Giuseppe Carleo, Kenny Choo, Damian Hofmann,
James ET Smith, Tom Westerhout, Fabien Alet, Emily J
Davis, Stavros Efthymiou, Ivan Glasser, Sheng-Hsuan
Lin, et al. Netket: A machine learning toolkit for many-
body quantum systems. SoftwareX, 10:100311, 2019.
[42] Attila Szab´ o and Claudio Castelnovo. Neural network
wave functions and the sign problem. Physical Review
Research, 2(3):033075, 2020.