 SciPost Physics                                                                        Submission

  Role of stochastic noise and generalization error in the timepropagation of neural-network quantum states


          D. Hofmann1α, G. Fabiani2β, J. H. Mentink2γ, G. Carleo3δ, M. A. Sentef1ϵ

              1  Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter,
                        Luruper Chaussee 149, 22761 Hamburg, Germany
                 2  Radboud University, Institute for Molecules and Materials,
                   Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, The Netherlands
         3  Institute of Physics,  ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL),
                                     1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
           αdamian.hofmann@mpsd.mpg.de,                           βg.fabiani@science.ru.nl,                   γj.mentink@science.ru.nl,

                          δgiuseppe.carleo@epﬂ.ch,  ϵmichael.sentef@mpsd.mpg.de


Abstract

Neural-network quantum states (NQS) have been shown to be a suitable varia-
tional ansatz to simulate out-of-equilibrium dynamics in two-dimensional systems
using time-dependent variational Monte Carlo (t-VMC). In particular, stable and
accurate time propagation over long time scales has been observed in the square-
lattice Heisenberg model using the Restricted Boltzmann machine architecture.
However, achieving similar performance in other systems has proven to be more
challenging.  In this article, we focus on the two-leg Heisenberg ladder driven out
of equilibrium by a pulsed excitation as a benchmark system.  We demonstrate
that unmitigated noise is strongly ampliﬁed by the nonlinear equations of motion
for the network parameters, which causes numerical instabilities in the time evo-
lution.  As a consequence, the achievable accuracy of the simulated dynamics is
a result of the interplay between network expressiveness and measures required
to  remedy  these  instabilities.   We  show  that  stability  can  be  greatly  improved
by appropriate choice of regularization.  This is particularly useful as tuning of
the regularization typically imposes no additional computational cost.  Inspired
by machine learning practice, we propose a validation-set based diagnostic tool
to  help  determining  optimal  regularization  hyperparameters  for  t-VMC  based
propagation schemes.  For our benchmark, we show that stable and accurate time
propagation can be achieved in regimes of suﬃciently regularized variational dy-
namics.


Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                         2

2   Model and methods                                                                                      3

3   Stability and regularization                                                       6
   3.1    Numerical instabilities from unmitigated noise                                                  6

                                                    1
  SciPost Physics                                                                                       Submission


    3.2    Inﬂuence of regularization                                                                  11

4   Overﬁtting to noise and validation error                                               14

5   Conclusions and outlook                                                                            18

A  Variational ansatz                                                                                19

B  Time propagation                                                                        20

C  Representability of the trajectory                                                       21

D  Alternative regularization schemes                                                      23

E  Validation error and Monte Carlo sample size                                         24

References                                                                                                          24




1  Introduction

In recent times, the application of machine learning methods to problems in quantum physics
has received considerable interest [1].  Examples include the use of neural networks for quan-
tum state reconstruction [2], quantum control [3] and feedback [4], as well as classifying phases
of matter [5–7].  Due to their success in approximating high-dimensional nonlinear functions in
machine learning applications, neural networks were proposed in 2017 as a variational ansatz
for the quantum wave function [8].  These neural-network quantum states (NQS) have been
applied to a wide variety of problems in quantum many-body physics, including spin [8–23],
bosonic [11,24] and fermionic [25,26] systems, as well as quantum computation [27,28] and
dissipative systems [29–32].  One particular research area where NQS could prove important
in  the  near  future  are  non-equilibrium  quantum  many-body  problems,  which  are  of  inter-
est  across  research  ﬁelds,  reaching  from  quantum  simulators  with  cold  atoms  and  trapped
ions  [33,34]  via  arrays  of  Rydberg  atoms  [35],  and  photonic  platforms  [36]  to  laser-driven
quantum  materials  [37].   The  theoretical  investigation  of  such  scenarios  is  restricted  by  a
lack of computational methods that allow researchers to reliably simulate driven correlated
systems, in particular in two dimensions.  NQS provide a promising candidate wave function
for the purpose of investigating out-of-equilibrium dynamics, in part due to their ability to
capture high-entanglement [38] and topological states of matter [9,10], which may serve to
complement other approaches, in particular those based on tensor network states [39].
    Typically,  NQS  are  time  propagated  using  time-dependent  variational  Monte  Carlo  (t-
VMC) [8,40,41].  So far, this has been studied in the literature primarily in the context of
quenches in the spin-1/2 Ising and Heisenberg models in both one and two dimensions [42–47].
In many cases, achieving numerical stability has been identiﬁed as the key challenge for the
reliable simulation of quantum dynamics [42–44] and also for ground state optimization using
imaginary time propagation [19].  In contrast, the capability of the NQS ansatz to represent


                                                             2
 SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


the relevant dynamical quantum states was not found to be a limiting factor.  However, the
general question which types of states can be represented well by a given network architecture
and the scaling of the required network size is still a matter of active research [20,23].
    In  this  work,  we  are  concerned  with  understanding  and  separating  diﬀerent  sources  of
instabilities that can prevent t-VMC time propagation to reach dynamical states even when
they  can  in  principle  be  captured  by  the  variational  ansatz.   To  this  end,  we  take  a  closer
look at dynamics in the antiferromagnetic 2D Heisenberg model, which has previously been
studied with t-VMC on a 2D square lattice geometry.  There, stable time propagation has been
demonstrated using the well-established restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) architecture
[45–47]. We compare this setting to the same Hamiltonian on a two-leg (    L×2) ladder geometry,
which features signiﬁcantly more complex quantum dynamics and which we ﬁnd to be much
more sensitive to numerical instabilities.  This is true already for very small systems which are
still accessible by exact numerical time evolution (exact diagonalization, ED) which provides
us with reliable data to benchmark the RBM dynamics.
    We  demonstrate  that  the  observed  instabilities  arise  primarily  as  a  result  of  stochastic
error, which is ampliﬁed through the generally ill-conditioned variational equations of motion.
The stability of the propagation can be improved by reducing noise through means such as
increasing the number of Monte Carlo samples or reducing the simulation time step, but this
comes at the cost of increasing the required computational resources.  However, we show that
regularization  of  the  equation  of  motion  also  helps  to  mitigate  the  eﬀects  of  noise  without
signiﬁcant  additional  computational  cost  and  highlight  the  strong  eﬀect  of  regularization
parameters on the quality of the resulting trajectory. Taking inspiration from machine learning
terminology, this eﬀect can be described as overﬁtting to stochastic noise, which leads to poor
reliability of the time stepping procedure.  As in machine learning, this type of overﬁtting can
be detected and quantiﬁed by validating the optimized time step on independently sampled
data,  leading  us  to  introduce  a  validation-set  variational  error  and  show  that  it  can  help
identify unstable regimes and thus optimize regularization hyperparameters.
    The main contributions of this work are therefore (i) presenting the two-leg Heisenberg
model as a particularly challenging system to simulate using NQS with t-VMC, making it a
useful benchmark case;  (ii) the analysis of diﬀerent sources of error and the eﬀect of regu-
larization on t-VMC propagation in this model; and (iii) the introduction of a validation-set
error for quantifying error due to overﬁtting to stochastic noise.
    This article is structured as follows:  In Section2we deﬁne the driven Heisenberg model
used as reference in the rest of this paper, in Section3we show the inﬂuence of regularization
on stability and accuracy of the NQS dynamics, and in Section4we discuss how this can be
quantiﬁed using a validation-set approach.  Finally, in Section5, we conclude and provide an
outlook on future work.

2  Model and methods

We  study  excitations  in  the  two-dimensional  antiferromagnetic  (AFM)  Heisenberg  model
(working in units with ℏ = 1),
                                 ˆH(t) =J0     ∑      ˆhij +J0 ∆x(t) ∑           ˆhij                                    (1)


                                             {i,j}∈N                   {i,j}∈Nx


                                                         3
 SciPost Physics                                                                                Submission






































Figure 1:   (a) Ladder and square lattice geometry for the 2D AFM Heisenberg model.  The
colors indicate theA andB sublattices of the bipartite model. In the ladder geometry, periodic
boundary conditions (PBC) in thex direction are imposed.  In the square geometry, PBC are
imposed in both directions.  (b) The Heisenberg system is driven out of its ground state by
modulating the x-bond coupling in a single pulse with shape ∆x(t) [Eq. (3)], here displayed
for Ap = 0.20, tp = 0.987J−10   , ωp = 8.0J0, and σp = 0.4J−20   .  (c) Oscillations of the x and
y  bond  spin-spin  correlations Cx/y(t)  [Eq.  (4)]  caused  by  the  pulse  for  both  geometries  as
computed from the exact time-evolved state.  (d) Overlap of the initial state|Φ0⟩ obtained
from ED with the exact time-evolved state|Ψ(t)⟩ =  ˆU(t)|Φ0⟩ for varying pulse amplitude Ap
and both geometries.  The other pulse parameters are the same as in panel (b).












                                                        4
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission

















Figure 2:    Restricted Boltzmann machine architecture used as a variational quantum state
withN visible units corresponding to the lattice size and a hidden unit density α.  A detailed
description of the ansatz is given in AppendixA.

where

                                                          3∑
                                                 ˆhij =       ˆσµi ˆσµj,                                                        (2)
                                                        µ=1

denotes the local Heisenberg coupling acting on each bond with the Pauli matrices  ˆσµi , µ∈
{1, 2, 3}, and exchange coupling strength J0 > 0.  Here, the outer sum runs over the nearest-
neighbor bondsN  of a ﬁnite-dimensional rectangular lattice L of sizeN =Lx×Ly [Fig.1(a)]
andNx/y⊆N  denotes subset ofx/y bonds.  We will consider two diﬀerent lattice geometries:
the  square  lattice  with  side  length L  := Lx  = Ly  and  the  ladder  geometry  with L  := Lx,
Ly = 2 sites.  In both cases, periodic boundary conditions inx direction are assumed.  For the
square lattice, we also impose periodic boundary conditions in the y direction.
    Starting from the ground state at t = 0, we study the time evolution of the system under
an excitation created by a pulsed modulation of the exchange coupling along the x direction
of the lattice (which is the long direction in the ladder system), which has the form [Fig.1(b)]
                                                        (               )
                          ∆x(t) =Ap sin(ωpt) exp           −(t−tp)22σp           for t≥ 0.                           (3)

This driving is physically motivated and can be viewed as a single-cycle THz pulse polarized
alongx which drives the exchange coupling through a Raman process [45,48].  The    y direction
coupling is kept constant.  In addition to the energy, we compute the average nearest-neighbor
bond correlation
                                                         ∑        3∑
                                        Cν(t) =  1N                  ⟨ˆσµi ˆσµj⟩                                             (4)
                                                       {i,j}∈Nν  µ=1

along the ν  = x,y  direction as an observable.  To obtain reference data, we have simulated
the time evolution under this pulse through exact (ED) propagation.  The resulting dynamics
are  shown  in  [Fig.1(c)].   In  both  systems,  the  pulse  causes  oscillations  that  persist  after
the pulse.  However, while our driving protocol causes only singlet excitations on the square
lattice, the ladder model exhibits both singlet and triplet excitations [49–51] and we indeed

                                                          5
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


observe more complex and irregular dynamics in the time-dependent bond correlations.  For
equal amplitude Ap  of the x-bond modulation,  the ladder system is more strongly aﬀected
[as evidenced by the higher distance to the initial state [Fig.1(d)].
    As a variational ansatz, we employ the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) with complex-
valued weights θ∈ CM  (Fig.2) as a parametrization of the quantum wave function ln    ψθ(s)
mapping basis spin conﬁgurations to the corresponding log-probability amplitudes. The trans-
lation symmetries of the lattice are enforced in the manner described in Refs. [8,45], which
reduce the number of variational parameters to M  = α(N + 1), where α is the hidden unit
density.  The translation group of an N  = L×L lattice with periodic boundary conditions
containsN  distinct operations.  In the ladder geometry, the notion of periodic boundary con-
ditions only applies to the long direction; however, we include the reﬂection symmetry along
the short direction, so the total order of the translation symmetries is still N.  The network
architecture is fully described in AppendixA.
    The  time  propagation  is  done  using  time-dependent  variational  Monte  Carlo  (t-VMC)
[8,40], which corresponds to numerically solving the equation of motion of the time-dependent
variational principle (TDVP)

                                           S(θ(t)) ˙θ =−iF (θ(t),t),                                                  (5)

where  ˙θ = dθ(t)/dt, using a stochastic estimate of the quantum Fisher matrix (QFM)

                                     Sij(θ) = E[Θ∗i Θj]− E[Θ∗i ]E[Θj],                                             (6)

and energy gradient

                                   Fi(θ,t) = E[Θ∗i H(t)]− E[Θ∗i ]E[H(t)],                                        (7)

with log-probability derivatives Θi(s) =∂i lnψθ(s) and local energy H(t)(s) = ⟨s| ˆH(t)|ψθ⟩⟨s|ψθ⟩  . The
expectation values E[·] are taken with respect to the Born probability distribution∼|ψθ(· )|2.
Further details on the t-VMC propagation scheme are provided in AppendixB. The initial
ground  state  is  prepared  by  minimizing  the  energy  of  a  randomly  initialized  RBM  using
stochastic reconﬁguration [41].

3  Stability and regularization

In this section,  we will highlight jump-like numerical instabilities that we ﬁnd to arise pri-
marily due to stochastic noise from VMC sampling that enters into the nonlinear equation of
motion (5), leading to missteps where the simulation diverges from the physical trajectory in
an irrecoverable fashion.  We will then show how regularization of the equation of motion can
stabilize the dynamics without requiring a change in time step or an increase in Monte Carlo
samples.

3.1Numerical instabilities from unmitigated noise
We  ﬁrst  highlight  the  practical  challenge  posed  by  the  highly  nonlinear  and  stochastic  t-
VMC equation of motion, by demonstrating how a change in lattice geometry of an otherwise
unaltered physical model can aﬀect the stability of the NQS propagation.

                                                         6
 SciPost Physics                                                                               Submission









































Figure 3:  Time-dependent per-site energy change  ¯E(t) = [⟨ ˆH(t)⟩−E(0)]/N  and average x-
bond correlation  ¯Cx(t) =Cx(t)−Cx(0) for the 8× 2 ladder [panels (a)–(c)] and 4× 4 square
geometry [panels (d)–(f)] and varying pulse strengthsAp. The trajectories have been obtained
from t-VMC evolution using MCMC [panels (a),(d)] and EMC [panels (b),(e)] sampling as
well as results based on full summation of the equations of motion [panels (c),(f)]; see Sect.3.1
for details.  The dashed lines show ED results for reference.  In all cases using a symmetric
RBM with hidden unit density of α = 10 has been used.  The initial state is the approximate
ground state of the respective system obtained by stochastic reconﬁguration and is the same
for panels (a)–(c) and (d)–(f), respectively.  In all cases, the equation of motion is evaluated
by singular-value decomposition of S and applying a diagonal shift of ϵ = 10−3 (see Sect.3.2
and AppendixD) for regularization.








                                                        7
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


    In previous works [45–47], it has been shown that the dynamics of the Heisenberg model on
a square lattice can indeed be successfully simulated using t-VMC with RBM quantum states.
We obtain equivalent results for our pulsed driving [Fig.3(d)–(f)].  The main manifestation of
the error as compared to the exact dynamics is a continuous decay of amplitude of the resulting
oscillations, which is visible from the averaged nearest-neighbor correlation Cx(t).  Increasing
the width of the network, i.e., the hidden unit density α, both improves the accuracy of the
initial (ground) state and reduces the loss of accuracy over the course of the time evolution
(data not shown).  This shows that the decay is the result of accumulated TDVP error and
can be reduced by an increase in network size, which is in agreement with results for a square
pulse excitation presented in Ref. [45].  However, this behavior is markedly diﬀerent for the
ladder geometry (with otherwise unchanged system parameters), where instabilities quickly
occur  during  t-VMC  evolution  already  for  weak  pulse  strengths Ap >  0.02  [Fig.3(a),(b)].
Notably,  the  observed  instabilities  violate  energy  conservation,  a  property  that  is  inherent
to  the  TDVP  equation  of  motion  for  a  static  Hamiltonian.   Therefore,  their  origin  has  to
be  numerical.   In  order  to  better  understand  which  sources  of  error  in  the  t-VMC  method
contribute to these instabilities, we compare three diﬀerent propagation schemes:

   1.t-VMC  propagation  where  the  components  of  the  equation  of  motion  are  estimated
       stochastically using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) with the Metropolis algorithm,
       which is the standard propagation method for NQS [8,41] [Fig.3(a),(d)];

   2.autocorrelation-free  “exact”  Monte  Carlo  (EMC),  where  samples  are  directly  drawn
       according  to  the  Born  distribution |ψ(· )|2  without  using  the  Metropolis  algorithm
       [Fig.3(b),(e)]; and

   3.time propagation based on full summation of the t-VMC equation of motion over all
       spin conﬁgurations, which provides a reference free of stochastic noise [Fig.3(c),(f)].

In the Metropolis MCMC scheme, updates to the spin conﬁguration are proposed based on
exchanges  of  spin  pairs  which  preserve  the  total  magnetization  and  thus  the  restriction  of
the ansatz to the zero-magnetization sector.  The EMC scheme can only be applied to small
systems accessible to ED, because it relies on the knowledge of the full Born distribution. Here,
it  is  used  strictly  as  a  benchmark  to  uncover  the  inﬂuence  of  noise  on  the  dynamics  while
ruling out errors due to non-convergence of the Metropolis sampling1.  The full summation
scheme is similarly limited to small systems with tractable Hilbert space.  We have used a
second-order Runge-Kutta method (Heun’s method) for time propagation in all cases, using
two evaluations of the equation of motion (5) per time step, a ﬁxed step size of  δt = 0.002
and Ns  =  7000  Monte  Carlo  samples  for  EMC  and  t-VMC.  Here  and  in  all  other  MCMC
simulations presented in this work, a number of Monte Carlo steps equal to the system size
N  is performed between each of the Ns samples included in the chain in order to reduce the
autocorrelation between successive samples.  While there is a visibly increased level of noise
with the MCMC sampling, divergences occur at similar time points of the evolution for both
approaches.  In the full summation results at the same driving strengths, the energy jumps are
absent and the dynamics are more accurately reproduced on the ladder with pulsesAp≤ 0.10
[Fig.3(c),(f)].  We note that even in the absence of stochastic noise, the time evolution shown

   1Note  that  autocorrelation-free  Monte  Carlo  sampling  is  practically  possible  beyond  the  ED  regime  for
NQS architectures based on autoregressive networks [52], though this is quite diﬀerent from the benchmark
implementation considered here.


                                                          8
 SciPost Physics                                                                                    Submission


















Figure 4: (a) Time evolution of the nearest-neighbor coupling termC01 =∑3µ=1⟨ˆσµ0 ˆσµ1⟩ using
the TDVP equation of motion evaluated by full summation with added artiﬁcial noise [Eq.8].
We show results for the dynamics on the 4× 4 lattice with pulse strength Ap = 0.20 for an
RBM with hidden unit densityα = 10. For each value of the noise strengthη, ﬁve independent
trajectories are shown as faint lines.  The opaque lines indicate the median of the respective
curves.  (b) Empirical standard deviation between the set of curves in panel (a) grouped by
noise strength η.


here fails to accurately capture the ladder dynamics for stronger excitations, as can be seen
from the Ap = 0.15 trajectory.  Furthermore, we note that the likelihood of instabilities can
be reduced by lowering the integrator time step, which, however, increases the computational
cost of the simulation.
    In  any  case,  the  occurrence  of  jump-type  instabilities  is  signiﬁcantly  more  likely  in  the
presence  of  Monte  Carlo  noise.   This  is  true  both  for  MCMC  and  EMC,  showing  that  the
instabilities are not just a result of failed convergence of the Markov chain sampling.  Indeed,
a noisy energy gradient alone is suﬃcient to cause the observed divergences when combined
with the t-VMC equation of motion for NQS. We show this in an idealized picture as follows:
Consider Eq. (5) without any stochastic sampling but with an artiﬁcial term of proportional
Gaussian white noise added to the energy gradient2.  This provides a direct way to control
the noise level without aﬀecting other steps in the propagation.  Speciﬁcally, we solve

                                                 S ˙θ =−i(F +ξ)                                                        (8)

whereξ is a random vector with components drawn from a complex normal distribution with
mean E[ξi] = 0 and variance Var[ξi] =|ηFi|2. The parameter η determines the relative noise
strength and the standard error in each component is proportional to|Fi|. The equation of
motion is solved using the same second-order Heun scheme used for the t-VMC simulation
and at a ﬁxed time step of δt = 0.002. In Fig.4(a) we show resulting trajectories for varying
noise levels η. For each value of η, ﬁve independent trajectories are shown.  In the absence
of instabilities, the standard deviation of the trajectories at ﬁrst grows with increasing noise

   2We note that the proportional Gaussian noise model of Eq. (8) is indeed a simpliﬁcation.  An analysis in
Ref. [44] shows that the actual noise level varies between components of the energy gradient and depends on the
quantum geometry of the ansatz (through the QFM spectrum) as well as the energy ﬂuctuations.  However,
already  the  simple  proportional  model  used  here  does  exhibit  the  jump-like  instabilities  when  subjected  to
noise ampliﬁed through the equation of motion.

                                                           9
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


















Figure 5:  (a),(b) Same trajectories as in Fig.4[(a),(b)] for a driving strength of    Ap = 0.10
and with varying time step δt at a ﬁxed noise level of η = 10−3.


[Fig.4(b)].   After  a  time  of  the  order  of  the  pulse  length,  the  spread  of  the  trajectories
stabilizes at a value that is independent of η.  For η≥ 10−3, jump instabilities occur within
the simulation time.  Whereas forη = 10−2 all trajectories show this instability already around
t = 1J−10   , the jumps happen more sporadically and at later times for η = 10−3, with only
two of the trajectories exhibiting a jump before t = 6J−10 . Reducing the integrator time step
decreases the frequency of instabilities in a similar fashion, as is shown in Fig.5.
    This  idealized  experiment  shows  that  random  noise  in  the  gradient  can  be  ampliﬁed
through Eq.5.  Together with the highly non-linear nature of the phase space of the NQS
ansatz (compare Ref. [19]), this can cause jump-type instabilities like we have observed in the
t-VMC propagation, instead of a gradually increasing spread of the trajectories that would
be expected for a more regular ansatz and equation of motion.  Both a reduction in noise level
and time step reduce the likelihood of instabilities.
    In agreement with observations made for other systems [19,44], we ﬁnd that the expressive
capabilities of the network are not a limiting factor.  For individual time points,  the exact
quantum state shown in Fig.3can indeed be represented to good accuracy by an RBM of
width α = 10. See AppendixCfor detailed results.
    Beyond the data shown here, we have observed RBM states with fewer parameters to be
generally  more  stable.   This,  however,  comes  at  the  cost  of  decreased  accuracy  over  time,
as  representational  error  accumulates  (cf.  Ref.  [45]).   The  numerical  instability  present  in
larger network thus counteracts the beneﬁts of increased expressiveness, making it particularly
important to ﬁnd ways of alleviating this eﬀect without signiﬁcant increase in computational
cost.   We  further  note  that  while  the  ladder  system  is  particularly  sensitive  to  the  types
of instabilities discussed here, they can also occur in the square lattice geometry.  We have
observed this both in the artiﬁcial noise model (Fig.4) and for a driving strength increased
beyondAp = 0.30 (data not shown).  Therefore, while the Heisenberg ladder is a very suitable
benchmark  system  for  these  types  of  numerical  issues,  the  observations  made  here  can  be
expected to apply to a broader class of systems, especially when they are driven far out of
equilibrium on short time scales.
    In  the  next  section,  we  will  discuss  how  the  choice  of  regularization  scheme  aﬀects  the
stability of the dynamics.



                                                          10
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


3.2Inﬂuence of regularization
The formal solution of the TDVP equation (5) is given by
                                                   ˙θ =−iS+F (t)                                                         (9)

where S+  denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of the QFM [8,42,44,46].  Computing
the pseudoinverse can be done by singular-value decomposition (SVD), which is equivalent to
the eigendecomposition in this case.  This is because S  is a covariance matrix and therefore
positive semi-deﬁnite,  i.e.,  all eigenvalues are nonnegative.  Then,  in the eigenbasis of S  =
V diag({ζj}Mj=1)V†, the TDVP equation reduces to

                                              ζj[V† ˙θ]j =−i[V†F ]j.                                                  (10)

We order the eigenvalues of S by magnitudeζ1≥ζ2...≥ζM  in the following and denote the
smallest nonzero eigenvalue by ζr.  Then, for all nonzero eigenvalues corresponding to j≤r,
we have [V† ˙θ]j =−iζ−1j   [V†F ]j.  The directions in the null-space ofS do not contribute to the
physical dynamics;  changes of θ  in those directions only aﬀect gauge degrees of freedom of
the quantum state.  In order to obtain the minimum-norm solution, these are set to zero, i.e.,
[V† ˙θ]j = 0 for j >r.
    In practice, the numerical solution of this equation is complicated by the fact that NQS
typically  possess  a  non-exponential  but  still  large  number  of  variational  parameters  com-
pared to more traditional variational wave functions and further allow for redundancy in the
parametrization of a speciﬁc quantum state.  As a consequence, the QFM is singular, and the
nonzero part of its spectrum typically spans many orders of magnitude [43,44,53].  Therefore,
the linear system (5) has a high condition number  κ(S) =ζ1/ζr  which, in particular, means
that small perturbations in the right-hand side F (t) can be strongly ampliﬁed in the solution
˙θ  of the equation of motion (EOM), causing the jump instabilities we have empirically ob-
served above.  For this reason, it is necessary to regularize the EOM in order to stabilize the
dynamics while preserving the physical accuracy of the resulting trajectory.  Typically, this is
done by truncating eigenvalues below a threshold λ in Eq. (9).  Speciﬁcally,  ζi  is treated as
zero when ζi≤λζ1. The eﬀective condition number of S is then bounded by κ≤λ−1. While
we focus on this regularization scheme in the remainder, our analysis also applies to a broader
class of regularization schemes.  In particular, the application of a diagonal shift to S  and a
signal-to-noise ratio based regularization scheme proposed in Ref. [44] are brieﬂy discussed in
AppendixD.
    Naturally, there is a trade-oﬀ between stability and accuracy: Too much regularization will
suppress crucial parts of the physical dynamics, while the system is susceptible to instabilities
without  or  with  only  weak  regularization.   This  can  be  seen  in  Fig.6,  where  we  show  the
inﬁdelity of the time-dependent quantum state relative to the ED time evolution of the system,

                                  E(t) = 1−  |⟨ΨED(t)|ψθ(t)⟩|2⟨ΨED(t)|ΨED⟩⟨ψθ(t)|ψθ(t)⟩,                                    (11)

for  varying  regularization  strength λ.   Speciﬁcally  for  the  weak  pulse  [Fig.6(a)],  we  can
clearly see a separation of three regimes:  an over-regularized regime (for λ≥ 10−4), where
the  dynamics  are  stable  but  inaccurate;  an  intermediate  stable  regime  where  the  physical
observables are accurate and the regularization still suﬃcient to stabilize the dynamics; and
an  unstable  regime  (λ≤  10−8)  where  jump  instabilities  occur  within  the  simulation  time

                                                          11
 SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



























Figure 6:    Inﬁdelity of the time-evolved variational state compared to the exact trajectory
for varying regularization (in the form of the SVD threshold λ).  The trajectories have been
computed using t-VMC with EMC [panels (a)–(c)] and Metropolis [panels (d)–(f)] sampling.
The  columns  correspond  to  a  weak  excitation Ap  =  0.02  [panels  (a),(d)]  and  a  moderate
excitation Ap  =  0.10  [panels  (b),(e)]  in  the  8× 2  ladder,  as  well  as  a  stronger  excitation
Ap = 0.20 in the 4× 4 square lattice [panels (c),(f)].  The initialE(t = 0) of order 10−5 is the
approximation error of the variational ground state. The time propagation has been computed
using t-VMC with EMC sampling with Ns  = 24000 samples for the ladder [panels (a),(b)]
andNs = 11200 for the square lattice [panel (c)].  We have used the symmetrized RBM ansatz
with a hidden unit density of α = 10.


frame.   While  for  the  weak  pulse  the  stable  regime  spans  several  orders  of  magnitude,  it
becomes smaller with increasing strength [Fig.6(b)].  By contrast, on the square lattice the
dynamics  remain  stable  and  largely  unaﬀected  by  the  regularization  strength  over  a  wide
range ofλ even at a pulse strength ofAp = 0.20 [Fig.6(c)].  These results have been obtained
with EMC sampling, but the same behavior can be observed for the practically relevant case
of  Metropolis  sampling,  which  is  shown  in  Fig.6[(d)–(f)].   In  this  case,  the  stable  regime
of  regularization  becomes  smaller  for  the  ladder  system.   Figure7shows  the  expectation
values of energy and bond correlations for several trajectories.  These observables show how
in the over-regularized regime, numerical stability comes at the cost of physical errors which
manifest here in an incorrect reproduction of the oscillation frequencies.  At the same time,
the  square  lattice  system  is  almost  unaﬀected  by  Metropolis  sampling,  except  at  very  low
thresholds.  Notably, for both EMC and MCMC sampling strategies, the dynamics converge
to a stable trajectory at a much lower number of Monte Carlo samples than in the the ladder
system.  This hints at an increased sampling complexity of the low-lying ladder excitations
in accordance with the higher physical complexity of the ladder excitations, an observation


                                                         12
 SciPost Physics                                                                                Submission
















































Figure 7:   Relative change in energy andx-bond correlation as deﬁned in Fig.3for a selection
of trajectories shown in Fig.6with diﬀerent regularization strengths    λ.











                                                        13
 SciPost Physics                                                                                    Submission


which is corroborated by our results in the next section.
    Altogether,  our results highlight the delicate balance between stability and accuracy of
the dynamics in the presence of stochastic noise and the resulting necessity to ﬁne-tune regu-
larization hyperparameters to reach the optimal regime.  From the comparison of ladder and
square geometry, we have further seen that the extent of this behavior depends strongly on
the details of the system.

4  Overﬁtting to noise and validation error

In order to choose an optimal regularization for a given system and excitation scheme, it is
important to have access to appropriate diagnostics.  While the error relative to ED as shown
in the previous section provides a straightforward way to assess the quality of the solution, this
option is restricted to small benchmark systems.  Here, we therefore propose an alternative
diagnostic which is more generally applicable.
    The local truncation error resulting from a single time step in the variational approxima-
tion is quantiﬁed by the TDVP error [8,44]
                                         [                                         ]2
                               r2(t) =     D(ψ[θ(t) +  ˙θδt], ˆUt+δt,tψ[θ(t)])         .                                (12)
                                                D(ψ[θ(t)], ˆUt+δt,tψ[θ(t)])

Here,D(·,·) denotes the Fubini-Study distance and  ˆUt′,t is the unitary time evolution operator
from t to t′.  The equation of motion (5) can be derived by locally minimizing the numerator
of  Eq.  (12).   The  denominator  provides  a  rescaling  of  the  error  to  account  for  the  varying
exact distance between points along the trajectory.  This quantity can be estimated to second
order in δt as [44]

                                 r2( ˙θ;S,F,δE) = 1 +  ˙θ†(S ˙θ + iF )− iF† ˙θ(δE)2                                              (13)

where (δE)2 = Var[ ˆH(t)] and the other quantities are deﬁned as in Eq. (5).
    While capturing loss of accuracy due to the variational approximation, the TDVP error
does not account for eﬀects caused by the stochastic noise aﬀecting the equation of motion and
thus its solution.  In order to account for this additional source of errors, we take inspiration
from a standard practice of machine learning:  the use of a so called validation error to detect
failure to generalize beyond the training data caused by overﬁtting to a speciﬁc sample [54].
Adapted  to  our  present  purpose,  we  consider  the  speciﬁc  realization  of  spin  conﬁgurations
used to estimate the EOM as the training set.  Solely optimizing the parameter update for
this realization bears the risk of overﬁtting, in which case the solution may be optimal only
on the training set but performs badly on independent estimates of the same EOM. In order
to detect this, we can compute two updates  ˙θ(i), i = 1, 2, from independently drawn samples
(separately estimating S(i), F (i)  for both).  While the resulting  ˙θ(i)  and corresponding error
estimates

                                        r2tr,i =r2( ˙θ(i);S(i),F (i),δE(i))                                            (14)

are  identically  distributed,  the  error  of  the  update  ˙θ(2)  with  respect  to  the  independently
estimated  equation  of  motion S(1) ˙θ  = −iF (1)  can  be  used  to  quantify  the  generalization

                                                          14
 SciPost Physics                                                                               Submission


























Figure 8:  Illustration of the process for computing the validation TDVP error as described in
Sect.4. Two sets of spin conﬁgurations are independently generated via Monte Carlo sampling
and used to obtain two independent derivatives through solving the equation of motion.  The
validation error (15) is then computed as the error of the second update with respect to the
ﬁrst equation of motion.
























Figure 9:    Integrated bare and validation TDVP error (16) over time with varying regular-
ization (SVD thresholdλ) for the same trajectories as shown in Fig.6(a),(b), i.e., using EMC
sampling and with pulse strengths of (a) Ap = 0.02 and (b) Ap = 0.10.  The bottom panels
show the time-dependent modulation ∆Jx(t) for reference.


                                                       15
 SciPost Physics                                                                                     Submission


















Figure 10:   Comparison of the TDVP error r2tr and the validation error r2val on a logarithmic
scale  for  varying  regularization  strength  in  the  form  of  the  SVD  threshold λ  at  diﬀerent
points in time for (a) a weakAp = 0.02 and (b) stronger driving amplitudeAp = 0.10 on the
8× 2 ladder system.  The TDVP error has been computed here by taking variational states
|ψθ(t)⟩ from the stable λ = 10−6  trajectory [Fig.6(d),(e)] and then performing a single step
δt = 0.002 at each displayed time and for eachλ using Metropolis sampling withNs = 28·103
samples.  We show here the average error over ﬁve independent realizations of the validation
error, with error bars indicating the standard deviation, in order to account for variance in
the error estimate itself.

properties of the parameter derivative.  This procedure is illustrated in Fig.8.  Speciﬁcally,
we deﬁne the validation TDVP error as
                                        r2val =r2( ˙θ(2);S(1),F (1),δE(1)).                                          (15)

Crucially,r2val can be estimated using only quantities that are accessible as part of the t-VMC
computation.  This makes it feasible to use the validation error as a diagnostic for the degree
of overﬁtting and thus reliability of the TDVP solution in systems where a comparison to ED
data is no longer possible.  If the solution of the EOM is deterministic, we have  ˙θ(1)  =  ˙θ(2)
and  consequently r2val  = r2tr,i.  Otherwise,  the  validation  error  will  be  larger,  indicating  the
amount of “overﬁtting” of the update  ˙θ(1) to noise present in the sample.  We note that the
error estimates are themselves aﬀected by noise in both EOM and energy variance.  This is
alleviated by considering the integral
                                                          ∫ t
                                          R2tr/val(t) =
                                                           0 r2tr/val(t′) dt′                                             (16)
or, if the local quantity is needed, by averaging over additional realizations of r2val.   Despite
its ad-hoc nature, we ﬁnd that this deﬁnition of a validation error provides a useful way of
quantifying how the regularization scheme aﬀects the solution of the EOM in the presence
of noise.  Figure9shows the integrated TDVP and validation error for weak and moderate
driving.  While the bare TDVP error is insensitive to the Monte Carlo error and corresponding
instabilities3, a clearly discernible eﬀect is present in the validation error which therefore shows

   3While R2tr  does increase for small λ eventually in Fig.9, this only happens after the jumps in the corre-
sponding trajectories have already occurred, in contrast to R2val which detects hints of the instability already
before that point.

                                                          16
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


















   Figure 11:   Validation error relative to the TDVP error for the data shown in Fig.10.


a much better qualitative agreement with the reference ED error (compare Fig.6).  Note that
we show here the error for EMC sampling because, while the utility of the local validation error
is not limited to this case, the integrated curves are strongly aﬀected by local perturbances
present in the MCMC data.
    Figure10shows the local TDVP and validation error over a range of thresholds at various
times during the duration of the pulse.  Here we can see that the unstable regimes of regu-
larization indeed correspond to an increased validation error r2val  compared to r2tr,  which is
consistent with their interpretation as being a consequence of overﬁtting to noise in the Monte
Carlo update, while in the stable regions almost no overﬁtting error is observed, indicating a
high degree of consistency between updates.  Furthermore, this behavior is not uniform over
time:  For Ap = 0.10, overﬁtting occurs particularly strongly at the waning edge of the pulse.
The degree of overﬁtting and its sensitivity to the regularization strength is signiﬁcantly lower
for the weaker excitation.  Note that the absolute magnitude of the TDVP error is not directly
comparable between diﬀerent pulse strengths.  This is because the denominator of Eq. (12)
depends on the distance between|ψ(t)⟩ and|ψ(t+δt)⟩ which decreases with decreasing driving
strength and goes to zero for vanishing dynamics.  Therefore, r2  measures the error relative
to the magnitude of the physical dynamics which puts the observed higher values of r2tr/val for
the weaker excitation strengths into perspective.  Data for the validation error relative to the
baseline TDVP error can be found in Fig.11.  The validation error also provides some insight
into the behavior of the propagation depending on the number of Monte Carlo samples, which
we brieﬂy show in AppendixE.
    We note that the region of increased overﬁtting coincides with a region where the exact
quantum states, while being representable to a ﬁdelity below 10−3, appear to be harder to
learn using a supervised scheme than states at other times (see AppendixC). However, we
would like to stress it is still possible to achieve stable and accurate propagation in this region
by suitable tuning of regularization and sample size, showing that an absolute inability of the
RBM ansatz to represent those states is not the issue.  The precise relationship between the
diﬃculty of supervised optimization, sampling complexity, and generalization error remains
an important question for further research, also in comparison with other works [23].
    In summary, we have demonstrated that the sensitivity of the ladder system to the regu-
larization scheme as well as the need for a high number of Monte Carlo samples to accurately
estimate  dynamics  especially  around  the  end  of  the  THz  pulse  is  indeed  captured  by  the

                                                        17
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


proposed TDVP validation error.  These eﬀects can thus be seen as a consequence of a lack
of generalization of the derivative estimate  ˙θ or overﬁtting to an insuﬃciently representative
sample of spin conﬁgurations.

5  Conclusions and outlook

We have presented the time propagation of the Heisenberg model on the two-leg ladder as a
key benchmark for neural-network-based methods to simulate quantum many-body dynamics.
In line with other studies, we have found that RBM quantum states are in principle capable
of representing the relevant quantum states during the simulated time evolutions, although
important open questions remain regarding the relationship between learnability and sampling
complexity  of  an  NQS.  However,  the  combination  of  (i)  numerical  instabilities  already  in
small  systems  and  (ii)  tunability  between  relatively  well-behaved  dynamics  on  the  square
lattice  and  the  much  more  challenging  dynamics  on  the  ladder  make  this  model  system  a
suitable  case  study  for  t-NQS.  Moreover,  larger-scale  ladders  can  also  be  simulated  with
tensor network states, which makes Heisenberg ladders an ideal drosophila  for more detailed
comparisons between diﬀerent systematically improvable variational ans¨atze and propagation
schemes beyond system sizes accessible to exact diagonalization.
    We have shed light on the delicate balance between stabilizing regularization and physical
accuracy  of  the  variational  time  evolution  in  the  presence  of  stochastic  noise  inherent  in
the  t-VMC  approach.   In  particular,  motivated  by  the  interpretation  of  these  instabilities
as  a  consequence  of  overﬁtting  to  Monte  Carlo  noise  in  the  equation  of  motion,  we  have
introduced  a  validation-set  approach  as  a  quantitative  diagnostic  of  the  noise-based  error.
We  have  demonstrated  that  this  validation  error  can  be  used  to  aid  in  the  optimization
of relevant hyperparameters and can help identifying critical regions where the propagation
becomes particularly sensitive to noise.  While this is particularly relevant for NQS dynamics,
the validation-set approach can be applied to t-VMC simulations using other variational states
as well as ground state optimization based on imaginary-time propagation.
    The speciﬁc validation error introduced here is based on a second-order approximation of
the TDVP error, which can be computed from quantities directly available during standard
t-VMC runs.  However, it is itself susceptible to noise and numerical instabilities.  Therefore,
while we have shown its capability of quantiﬁying the inﬂuence of regularization and high-
lighting regions of particularly unstable dynamics, ﬁnding a more robust measure of the error
may be a useful line of future research.
    The ability of quantifying the generalization error in t-VMC propagation also opens up
the possibility of devising an adaptive scheme to control regularization hyperparameters and
Monte Carlo sampling in order to achieve stable dynamics without the need for manual ﬁne
tuning. This is particularly relevant for general NQS software frameworks such as netket [55]
which strive to be usable in a wide range of physical settings.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge helpful discussions with Filippo Vicentini.  Simulations have been performed
using a t-VMC implementation based on netket 2.1b1 [55] as well as code based on     ultra-


                                                        18
 SciPost Physics                                                                              Submission


fast [45].  The exact Schr¨odinger dynamics have been computed using     qutip 4.5.0 [56].  We
acknowledge support from Flatiron Institute, a division of the Simons Foundation.

Author contributions

D.H. implemented the t-VMC simulation code based on netket, performed simulations and
data analysis, wrote the initial manuscript, with contributions from M.A.S., and created the
ﬁgures.  G.F. contributed t-VMC and full summation results using an independent implemen-
tation (ultrafast). J.H.M., G.C., and M.A.S. conceived the project. All authors contributed
to discussions throughout the project and the preparation of the ﬁnal manuscript.

Funding information

G.F. and J.H.M. acknowledge funding from the Shell-NWO/FOM- initiative “Computational
sciences for energy research” of Shell and Chemical Sciences, Earth and Life Sciences, Physical
Sciences,  FOM and STW. M.A.S. acknowledges ﬁnancial support by Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (German Research Foundation, DFG) under the Emmy Noether program (SE
2558/2).

A Variational ansatz

In our simulations, we employ the translation-invariant RBM ansatz as introduced in Ref. [8].
Explicitly,

                                                  Nh∑
                                     lnψθ(s) =        ln cosh [ ˜Ws + ˜b]j.                                          (17)
                                                  j=1

Here, the full weight matrix  ˜W∈ CNh×N  and hidden bias ˜b∈ CNh  are deﬁned in terms of a
smaller number of independent parameters W∈ Cα×N  and b∈ Cα, ensuring that ψ(τ(s)) =
ψ(s) for all N  lattice translations τ.  We refer to the independent parameters collectively as
θ = (W,b)∈ CM. This ansatz reduces the number of variational parameters toM =α(N +1)
where α  = Nh/N  is  the  hidden  unit  density.   Thus,  the  dimension  of  the  parameter  space
grows only linearly in the system size for the symmetric RBM ansatz.  Note that RBM wave
functions can include another term, the visible bias ˜a∈ CN, as ψa,θ(s) = e˜a⊤sψθ(s). When
enforcing translation invariance in the manner described above, only one component of the
visible bias ˜ai  = a∈ C remains independent which is redundant in the zero magnetization
sector and therefore not included in our variational ansatz.
    In addition to enforcing translation symmetry, we restrict the state space of the model to
the zero magnetization subspace of the full Hilbert space.  Thus,  the ansatz wave function
is  only  evaluated  for  spin  conﬁgurations  satisfying ∑jsj  =  0  and ψθ(s)  =  0  is  assumed
otherwise.  For N  sites, the dimension of the full Hilbert space is 2N, the zero-magnetization). Note that the driving is compatible with both the translation
subspace has dimension( NN/2
symmetry  and  zero  magnetization  constraints.   Furthermore,  all  of  our  calculations  were

                                                       19
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


performed in a computational basis taking into account the sign structure of the AFM ground
state, which is a standard approach for the Heisenberg model [57–59] and helps circumvent
the diﬃculty of learning states with a nontrivial sign structure, which is a more challenging
task  for  NQS  [17,18].   Speciﬁcally,  this  is  done  as  follows:  Let   {|s⟩| s∈{±1}N}  denote
the  ˆσz  eigenbasis,  so  that  ˆσzi|s⟩  = si|s⟩.  In  the  AFM  phase,  the  Heisenberg  model  has  a
nondegenerate ground state

                                            |Φ0⟩ =  ∑           Φ0(s)|s⟩                                                (18)
                                                      s∈{±1}N

which  is  part  of  the  zero  eigenspace  of  the  magnetization   ˆMz  = ∑i∈L ˆσzi.  On  a  bipartite
lattice where the sites are partitioned into disjoint subsetsA andB [compare Fig.1(a),(b)],
the ground state coeﬃcients have the form

                                             Φ0(s) = (−1)ϖ(s)A0(s)                                                 (19)

whereA0(s)∈ R>0 is real and nonnegative.  The parity ϖ(s) =∑i∈Asi is determined by the
magnetization on theA sublattice.  This property is known as Marshall’s sign rule [60] and
makes it possible to represent the ground state by a real nonnegative wave function in the
computational basis|sc⟩ =∏i∈A ˆσzi|s⟩, which signiﬁcantly improves convergence of the NQS
ground state optimization as the network only needs to learn a trivial sign structure.

B Time propagation

In  t-VMC  [40,41],  the  time  propagation  of  the  variational  ansatz  is  based  on  the  time-
dependent variational principle (TDVP). The equation of motion for the vector of variational
parameters θ∈ CM  is  given  by  dθ(t)/dt  =  ˙θ,  where  ˙θ  is  the  solution  of  the  linear  system
Eq. (5).  The quantities involved in this equation are the quantum Fisher matrix (QFM)

                               Sij(θ) =⟨∂iψθ|∂jψθ⟩⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩ −⟨∂iψθ|ψθ⟩⟨ψθ|∂jψθ⟩⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩2                                           (20)

and the energy gradient


                             Fi(θ,t) = ∂⟨ ˆH(t)⟩∂θ∗i      =⟨∂iψθ| ˆH(t)−⟨ ˆH(t)⟩|ψθ⟩⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩      .                              (21)

Here,∂i =∂/∂θi denotes the complex partial derivative with respect toθi. Geometrically, the
QFM accounts for the local curvature around|ψθ⟩ on the manifold of variational states.  This
is analogous to the role of the Fisher information matrix for classical probability distributions
[28], which is used in natural gradient descent [61].  The QFM only depends on the form of
the variational ansatz and the location in parameter space but not on the Hamiltonian.  Still,
analysis of its structure and,  in particular,  its spectrum can give insight into the quantum
properties and phase diagram of the system for the RBM ansatz [53].
    In t-VMC, both QFM and gradient are estimated as stochastic expectations values E[· ]
with respect to the Born probability distribution∼|ψθ(· )|2 as written in Eqs. (6) and (7). The
resulting equations of motion are valid for a complex diﬀerentiable (holomorphic) mapping

                                                          20
 SciPost Physics                                                                                Submission




































Figure 12:   (a) Inﬁdelity [Eq. (11)],      (b) energy, and (c) spin-spin correlation Cx for α = 2
andα = 10 RBM states obtained from supervised learning of the amplitudes along the exact
trajectory at an excitation strength ofAp = 0.10. For each time point, the best-ﬁdelity results
among ﬁve independently optimized states are displayed.  See AppendixCfor further details.


θ↦→ψθ  between the parameters and the quantum wave function.  This is indeed satisﬁed by
the symmetric RBM ansatz.
    In order to obtain the ground states used as initial states for the time propagation, we have
used stochastic reconﬁguration [8,41], which is based on an approximation of the imaginary-
time Schr¨odinger equation in the manner of Eq. (5).

C Representability of the trajectory

Even  though  wider  RBMs  are  necessary  in  order  to  better  follow  the  true  dynamics  via
TDVP-based  propagation,  the  states  along  the  trajectories  considered  here  are  in  general
not  signiﬁcantly  harder  to  learn  by  an  RBM  than  the  ground  state.   In  order  to  test  this
statement, we ﬁt RBMs with α = 2 and α = 10 to the exact states along the ED trajectory
|Ψ(t)⟩ in the ladder system using a supervised learning approach.  The results presented here


                                                        21
 SciPost Physics                                                                                    Submission


have been computed using the supervised learning implementation available in NetKet [55].
Speciﬁcally, for each given time t, we minimize the negative log-overlap loss

                                       Lt(θ) =− ln⟨ψθ|Ψ(t)⟩⟨Ψ(t)|ψθ⟩⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩⟨Ψ(t)|Ψ(t)⟩                                          (22)

using the known probability amplitudes of the exact states that we have obtained from ED.
Starting from an approximate ground state, we have run a natural-gradient based optimization
[61] targeting this loss function for   n = 1000 steps at a constant learning rate of γ  = 0.01.
This corresponds to a parameter update

                                            θ(i+1)←θ(i)−γgt(θ(i))                                                (23)

with the loss gradient gt(θ) which is the least-squares solution of the linear equation

                                              S(θ)gt(θ) =∇θLt(θ).                                                  (24)

The QFM S(θ) is deﬁned in the same way as in the main text.  In practise, we evaluate the
loss Lt(θ) on batches of  spin conﬁgurations{s(i)}Bi=1  of size B  = 1000 per step,  which are
randomly drawn from a uniform distribution over all zero-magnetization conﬁgurations on the
lattice.  Note that this update equation is of the same form as in stochastic reconﬁguration
(SR)  [41].   This  is  because  SR  is  a  special  case  of  the  natural  gradient  descent  approach
applied  to  the  energy  expectation  value  as  opposed  to  a  general  loss  function  [28].   The
optimization  is  performed  independently  for  each  time t.   Results  for  the  ﬁnal  inﬁdelity,
energy, and spin-spin correlation are shown in Fig.12.  For each time point, the best-ﬁdelity
state has been selected from ﬁve independent optimizations from the same initial state and
with the same parameters4.  Already at a small hidden unit density of α = 2, the trajectory
can be represented with an inﬁdelity of the order of 10−3 with good accuracy in energy and
spin correlations.  For a wider network at α = 10 and starting from a well-converged initial
state  atE  =  10−5,  the  trajectory  can  be  captured  with  inﬁdelity  below  10−3  throughout,
although a peak of inﬁdelity is clearly visible around t∗≈ 1.65.  The location of this peak
matches the region of increased overﬁtting and thus instability observed in Sect.4(compare
Fig.10).  However, even though the peak region is more prone to instabilities, it can still be
passed by t-VMC if the time propagation is suﬃciently stabilized (compare Fig.7).  Thus,
the increased ﬁnal inﬁdelity of the learned excited states is not necessarily an indication of
an absolute inability of the RBM ansatz to capture them more accurately but may also be
attributed to an increased diﬃculty of the optimization.
    Altogether, these results provide an upper bound on the minimal inﬁdelity achievable by
an optimal RBM representation of the dynamic states at a given size and thus indicate that
the representability of the time-evolved states is not the key limitation here.  Therefore, an
improved time propagation scheme should be expected to be able to reach the accuracy of
the supervised learned states.

   4In the region of peak inﬁdelity around t∗  deﬁned below, the optimization of the α = 2 RBM frequently
became unstable after reaching the minimal energy, leading to an increased energy after 1000 steps compared
to the actual achievable minimum.  Therefore, for the results presented here, the iteration has been stopped
early after 10 successive steps without reduction of the loss in this region.  The optimization of the α = 10
RBM did not have this issue.



                                                          22
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission






















Figure 13:    Inﬁdelity of the time-evolved variational state compared to the exact trajectory
for (a) the diagonal shift regularization with varying strength ϵ and (b) the signal-to-noise
(SNR) ratio based regularization of Ref. [44] with varying threshold   λSNR. The trajectories
have been computed using t-VMC with EMC at a moderate excitation strength of Ap = 0.10
in the 8× 2 ladder geometry using the symmetrized RBM ansatz with a hidden unit density
of α = 10.

D Alternative regularization schemes

There are many ways to regularize the linear equation of motion (5) to reduce its susceptibility
to noise.  We have focused here on the conceptually simple method of truncating the QFM
spectrum at a relative threshold as described in Sect.3.2.  Alternatively,  the EOM can be
regularized by adding a diagonal shift  ˜S =S +ϵI withϵ> 0. This is typically done for ground
state optimization (see, e.g., Refs. [8,42,46]), but can in principle also be applied to the time-
dependent case.  SinceS is Hermitian and positive semi-deﬁnite, the spectrum of the shifted  ˜S
is bounded from below byϵ, making the matrix invertible and bounding the condition number
byκ( ˜S)≤ (ζ1 +ϵ)/ϵ. Therefore, a shift signiﬁcantly larger than machine precision also serves
to improve the condition number and stabilize the propagation in a fashion similar to the SVD
cutoﬀ.  This can be seen in Fig.13(a) which shows a similar behavior of the shift regularization
when compared to the threshold in Fig.6.  A more sophisticated regularization strategy has
recently been proposed in Ref. [44].  This approach truncates parts of the equations of motion
akin to the singular value threshold above but taking into account the strength of VMC noise
in  diﬀerent  components  of  the  energy  gradient.   Speciﬁcally,  directions  in  the S  eigenbasis
are  discarded  based  on  a  softened  cutoﬀ λSNR  of  the  signal-to-noise  of  the  corresponding
component  of  the  energy  gradient  which  can  be  estimated  from  the  t-VMC  data.   When
applying this approach to the ladder geometry, we have found a behavior similar to the other
methods discussed above as a function of varying λSNR [Fig.13(b)].  This highlights that the
trade-oﬀ between stability and physical accuracy we have discussed and the need for reliable
diagnostics is relevant beyond the simple regularization scheme used in the main text.




                                                        23
 SciPost Physics                                                                                    Submission


E Validation error and Monte Carlo sample size

While sensitive to the regularization, the Monte Carlo error in the update  ˙θ is of course also
dependent on the number of samples used in the estimate of the equation of motion.  The
fewer samples are used,  the higher the generalization error with respect to the full Hilbert
space  will  be.   As  with  the  regularization,  this  behavior  is  strongly  system  and  excitation
dependent.   For  the  square  lattice  geometry,  convergence  with  respect  to  the  sample  size
occurs  quickly  compared  to  the  ladder  system,  where  a  much  higher  number  of  samples
is  needed  to  obtain  reliable  estimates.   This  indicates  a  higher  sampling  complexity  of  the
ladder states compared to the well-behaved singlet magnon excitation in the square lattice,
as is qualitatively captured by the validation error.  This is demonstrated in Fig.14, which
shows the TDVP and validation error, and Fig.15, which shows the relative validation error,
as  a  function  of  sample  size  for  both  geometries  and  diﬀerent  driving  strengths.   We  see  a
clear overﬁtting behavior which is especially strong around the waning edge of the pulse, as is
similarly observed in the regularization dependence in Section4, and which is only suppressed
by increasing the number of samples up to∼ 28·103 for the ladder5.  In contrast, convergence
of the validation error in the square lattice system occurs much faster, even for the stronger
excitation shown here.

References

 [1]G.  Carleo,  I.  Cirac,  K.  Cranmer,  L.  Daudet,  M.  Schuld,  N.  Tishby,  L.  Vogt-Maranto
      and L. Zdeborov´a,  Machine learning and the physical sciences,  Rev. Mod. Phys. 91(4),
      045002 (2019),  doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.91.045002.
 [2]G.   Torlai,   G.   Mazzola,   J.   Carrasquilla,   M.   Troyer,   R.   Melko   and   G.   Carleo,
      Neural-network   quantum   state   tomography,       Nature   Physics  14(5),   447   (2018),
      doi:10.1038/s41567-018-0048-5.

 [3]M.  Bukov,  A.  G.  R.  Day,  D.  Sels,  P.  Weinberg,  A.  Polkovnikov  and  P.  Mehta,       Rein-
      forcement Learning in Diﬀerent Phases of Quantum Control, Phys. Rev. X 8(3), 031086
      (2018),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.8.031086.
 [4]T.  F¨osel,   P.  Tighineanu,   T.  Weiss  and  F.  Marquardt,          Reinforcement   Learning
      with  Neural  Networks  for  Quantum  Feedback,    Phys.  Rev.  X  8(3),  031084  (2018),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.8.031084.

 [5]J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko,       Machine  learning  phases  of  matter,  Nature Physics
      13(5), 431 (2017),  doi:10.1038/nphys4035.
 [6]B. S. Rem, N. K¨aming, M. Tarnowski, L. Asteria, N. Fl¨aschner, C. Becker, K. Sengstock
      and C. Weitenberg, Identifying quantum phase transitions using artiﬁcial neural networks
      on experimental data,  Nature Physics (2019),  doi:10.1038/s41567-019-0554-0.

   5We note that simulations with larger sample sizes are computationally feasible (compare, e.g., Ref. [44]).
However, ∼ 28 · 103  already exceeds the Hilbert space dimension of our benchmark systems by more than a
factor of two.  Given this already large relative size and the fact that MCMC convergence is proportional to
the square root of the (eﬀective) sample size,  we consider it important to be able to stabilize the dynamics
through regularization in this regime.

                                                          24
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission

























Figure 14:   (a),(b) Comparison of TDVP and validation error for varying number of Monte
Carlo samples on a linear scale for the same trajectory and parameters as in Fig.10,  with
λ = 10−6  and at driving amplitudes Ap = 0.02 [panel (a)] and Ap = 0.10 [panel (b)] in the
8× 2 ladder system. (c) The same data for anAp = 0.20 pulse in the 4× 4 square geometry.
In all panels, the error bars indicate the standard deviation over ﬁve independent realizations
of the validation error as in Fig.10.

























   Figure 15:   Validation error relative to the TDVP error for the data shown in Fig.14.



                                                        25
 SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


 [7]A. Bohrdt, C. S. Chiu, G. Ji, M. Xu, D. Greif, M. Greiner, E. Demler, F. Grusdt and
     M. Knap,  Classifying snapshots of the doped Hubbard model with machine learning, Nat.
     Phys. 15(9), 921 (2019),  doi:10.1038/s41567-019-0565-x.

 [8]G. Carleo and M. Troyer,      Solving the quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural
     networks,  Science 355(6325), 602 (2017),  doi:10.1126/science.aag2302.

 [9]I.  Glasser,  N.  Pancotti,  M.  August,  I.  D.  Rodriguez  and  J.  I.  Cirac,       Neural-Network
     Quantum States, String-Bond States, and Chiral Topological States,  Phys. Rev. X 8(1),
     011006 (2018),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.8.011006.

[10]R. Kaubruegger,  L. Pastori and J. C. Budich,         Chiral  topological  phases  from  artiﬁcial
     neural networks, Phys. Rev. B 97(19), 195136 (2018), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.97.195136.

[11]K. Choo, G. Carleo, N. Regnault and T. Neupert,        Symmetries and Many-Body Excita-
     tions  with  Neural-Network  Quantum  States,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 121(16),  167204 (2018),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.167204.

[12]X. Liang, W.-Y. Liu, P.-Z. Lin, G.-C. Guo, Y.-S. Zhang and L. He,         Solving  frustrated
     quantum many-particle models with convolutional neural networks, Phys. Rev. B 98(10),
     104426 (2018),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.104426.

[13]L.   Pastori,   R.   Kaubruegger   and   J.   C.   Budich,              Generalized   transfer   matrix
     states   from   artiﬁcial   neural   networks,       Phys.   Rev.   B   99(16),   165123   (2019),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.99.165123.

[14]K.  Choo,  T.  Neupert  and  G.  Carleo,         Two-Dimensional  Frustrated J1-J2  Model  Stud-
     ied  with  Neural  Network  Quantum  States,    Phys.  Rev.  B  100(12),  125124  (2019),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.125124.

[15]D.   Hendry   and   A.   E.   Feiguin,             Machine   learning   approach   to   dynamical   prop-
     erties   of   quantum   many-body   systems,      Phys.   Rev.   B  100(24),   245123   (2019),
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.245123.

[16]T. Vieijra, C. Casert, J. Nys, W. De Neve, J. Haegeman, J. Ryckebusch and F. Verstraete,
     Restricted Boltzmann Machines for Quantum States with Non-Abelian or Anyonic Sym-
     metries,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 124(9), 097201 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.097201.

[17]T. Westerhout, N. Astrakhantsev, K. S. Tikhonov, M. I. Katsnelson and A. A. Bagrov,
     Generalization properties of neural network approximations to frustrated magnet ground
     states,  Nat Commun 11(1), 1 (2020),  doi:10.1038/s41467-020-15402-w.

[18]A. Szab´o and C. Castelnovo,        Neural network wave functions and the sign problem, Phys.
     Rev. Research 2(3), 033075 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033075.

[19]M. Bukov, M. Schmitt and M. Dupont,         Learning  the  ground  state  of  a  non-stoquastic
     quantum Hamiltonian in a rugged neural network landscape, SciPost Phys. 10, 147 (2021),
     doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.10.6.147.

[20]C.-Y. Park and M. J. Kastoryano,         Expressive  power  of  complex-valued  restricted  boltz-
     mann machines for solving non-stoquastic hamiltonians  (2021), arXiv:2012.08889v2.


                                                         26
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


[21]N. Astrakhantsev, T. Westerhout, A. Tiwari, K. Choo, A. Chen, M. H. Fischer, G. Carleo
      and T. Neupert, Broken-symmetry ground states of the heisenberg model on the pyrochlore
      lattice (2021), arXiv:2101.08787.

[22]A. Valenti, E. Greplova, N. H. Lindner and S. D. Huber,         Correlation-enhanced  neural
      networks as interpretable variational quantum states  (2021), arXiv:2103.05017.

[23]S.-H. Lin and F. Pollmann,        Scaling of neural-network quantum states for time evolution
      (2021), arXiv:2104.10696.

[24]K.  McBrian,  G.  Carleo  and  E.  Khatami,          Ground  state  phase  diagram  of  the  one-
      dimensional  Bose-Hubbard  model  from  restricted  Boltzmann  machines,  J. Phys.:  Conf.
      Ser. 1290, 012005 (2019),  doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1290/1/012005.
[25]Y. Nomura, A. S. Darmawan, Y. Yamaji and M. Imada,        Restricted Boltzmann machine
      learning  for  solving  strongly  correlated  quantum  systems,  Phys. Rev. B 96(20), 205152
      (2017),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.205152.

[26]K.  Choo,  A.  Mezzacapo  and  G.  Carleo,         Fermionic  neural-network  states  for  ab-initio
      electronic  structure,  Nature Communications 11(1),  2368 (2020),  doi:10.1038/s41467-
      020-15724-9.
[27]B. J´onsson, B. Bauer and G. Carleo,        Neural-network  states  for  the  classical  simulation
      of quantum computing  (2018),  arXiv:1808.05232.
[28]J. Stokes, J. Izaac, N. Killoran and G. Carleo,        Quantum Natural Gradient,  Quantum 4,
      269 (2020),  doi:10.22331/q-2020-05-25-269.

[29]G.  Torlai  and  R.  G.  Melko,         Latent  Space  Puriﬁcation  via  Neural  Density  Operators,
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 120(24), 240503 (2018),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.240503.

[30]M.   J.   Hartmann   and   G.   Carleo,               Neural-Network    Approach    to    Dissipative
      Quantum   Many-Body   Dynamics,        Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   122(25),    250502   (2019),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.250502.
[31]N.   Yoshioka   and   R.   Hamazaki,                Constructing    neural    stationary    states    for
      open    quantum    many-body    systems,         Phys.   Rev.   B   99(21),    214306   (2019),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.99.214306.

[32]F.  Vicentini,  A.  Biella,  N.  Regnault  and  C.  Ciuti,         Variational  neural-network  ansatz
      for  steady  states  in  open  quantum  systems,    Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  122,  250503  (2019),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.250503.
[33]J. Eisert, M. Friesdorf and C. Gogolin,        Quantum many-body systems out of equilibrium,
      Nature Physics 11(2), 124 (2015),  doi:10.1038/nphys3215.
[34]R. J. Lewis-Swan, A. Safavi-Naini, A. M. Kaufman and A. M. Rey,        Dynamics of quantum
      information,  Nature Reviews Physics 1(10), 627 (2019),  doi:10.1038/s42254-019-0090-y.
[35]D. Bluvstein, A. Omran, H. Levine, A. Keesling, G. Semeghini, S. Ebadi, T. T. Wang,
      A. A. Michailidis, N. Maskara, W. W. Ho, S. Choi, M. Serbyn et al., Controlling quantum
      many-body  dynamics  in  driven  Rydberg  atom  arrays,   Science 371(6536),  1355  (2021),
      doi:10.1126/science.abg2530.

                                                          27
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


[36]I. Carusotto and C. Ciuti,        Quantum  ﬂuids  of  light,  Reviews of Modern Physics 85(1),
      299 (2013),  doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.85.299.

[37]A. de la Torre, D. M. Kennes, M. Claassen, S. Gerber, J. W. McIver and M. A. Sentef,
      Colloquium:  Nonthermal pathways to ultrafast control in quantum materials,  Rev. Mod.
      Phys. 93, 041002 (2021),  doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.93.041002.

[38]D.-L. Deng, X. Li and S. Das Sarma,        Quantum  entanglement  in  neural  network  states,
      Phys. Rev. X 7, 021021 (2017),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.7.021021.

[39]J.  Eisert,  M.  Cramer  and  M.  B.  Plenio,         Colloquium:  Area  laws  for  the  entanglement
      entropy,  Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 277 (2010),  doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.82.277.

[40]G. Carleo, F. Becca, M. Schir´o and M. Fabrizio,        Localization  and  Glassy  Dynamics  Of
      Many-Body Quantum Systems,  Scientiﬁc Reports 2, 243 (2012),  doi:10.1038/srep00243.

[41]F.  Becca  and  S.  Sorella,          Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Approaches  for  Correlated  Systems,
      Cambridge  University  Press,  ﬁrst  edn.,    ISBN  978-1-107-12993-1  978-1-316-41704-1,
      doi:10.1017/9781316417041(2017).

[42]S.  Czischek,  M.  G¨arttner  and  T.  Gasenzer,          Quenches  near  Ising  quantum  critical-
      ity  as  a  challenge  for  artiﬁcial  neural  networks,   Phys.  Rev.  B 98(2),  024311  (2018),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.024311.

[43]I. L´opez-Guti´errez and C. B. Mendl,        Real  time  evolution  with  neural-network  quantum
      states,  arXiv:1912.08831 (2019),  arXiv:1912.08831.

[44]M.   Schmitt   and   M.   Heyl,               Quantum    many-body    dynamics    in    two    dimen-
      sions   with   artiﬁcial   neural   networks,       Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   125,   100503   (2020),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.100503.

[45]G.  Fabiani  and  J.  Mentink,         Investigating  ultrafast  quantum  magnetism  with  machine
      learning,  SciPost Physics 7(1), 004 (2019),  doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.7.1.004.

[46]G. Fabiani and J. H. Mentink,       Ultrafast entanglement dynamics and spreading of quantum
      correlations in two-dimensional antiferromagnets  (2019), arXiv:1912.10845.

[47]G.   Fabiani,    M.   Bouman   and   J.   Mentink,                Supermagnonic    propagation    in
      two-dimensional    antiferromagnets,          Physical    Review    Letters   127(9)    (2021),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.097202.

[48]D. Bossini, S. Dal Conte, G. Cerullo, O. Gomonay, R. V. Pisarev, M. Borovsak, D. Mi-
      hailovic, J. Sinova, J. H. Mentink, T. Rasing and et al., Laser-driven quantum magnonics
      and terahertz dynamics of the order parameter in antiferromagnets,  Physical Review B
      100(2) (2019),  doi:10.1103/physrevb.100.024428.

[49]T. Barnes, E. Dagotto, J. Riera and E. S. Swanson,        Excitation  spectrum  of  Heisenberg
      spin ladders,  Phys. Rev. B 47, 3196 (1993),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.47.3196.

[50]S. Gopalan, T. M. Rice and M. Sigrist,        Spin ladders with spin gaps:  A description of a
      class of cuprates,  Phys. Rev. B 49, 8901 (1994),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.49.8901.


                                                          28
 SciPost Physics                                                                                   Submission


[51]E.   Dagotto   and   T.   M.   Rice,               Surprises    on    the    way    from    one-    to    two-
      dimensional  quantum  magnets:  The  ladder  materials,   Science 271(5249),  618  (1996),
      doi:10.1126/science.271.5249.618.

[52]O. Sharir, Y. Levine, N. Wies, G. Carleo and A. Shashua,         Deep  autoregressive  models
      for the eﬃcient variational simulation of many-body quantum systems,  Phys. Rev. Lett.
      124, 020503 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.020503.

[53]C.-Y. Park and M. J. Kastoryano,        Geometry  of  learning  neural  quantum  states,  Phys.
      Rev. Research 2, 023232 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023232.

[54]I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio and A. Courville,         Deep  Learning,  MIT Press,  http://www.
      deeplearningbook.org (2016).

[55]G. Carleo, K. Choo, D. Hofmann, J. E. T. Smith, T. Westerhout, F. Alet, E. J. Davis,
      S.  Efthymiou,  I.  Glasser,  S.-H.  Lin,  M.  Mauri,  G.  Mazzola  et  al.,    NetKet:   A  ma-
      chine  learning  toolkit  for  many-body  quantum  systems,   SoftwareX 10,  100311  (2019),
      doi:10.1016/j.softx.2019.100311.

[56]J.  R.  Johansson,  P.  D.  Nation  and  F.  Nori,         QuTiP  2:   A  Python  framework  for  the
      dynamics  of  open  quantum  systems,  Computer Physics Communications 184(4),  1234
      (2013),  doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2012.11.019.

[57]D. J. Klein,         Ground-state  features  for  Heisenberg  models,  J. Chem. Phys. 77(6), 3098
      (1982),  doi:10.1063/1.444232.

[58]U. Schollwoeck,        Marshall’s sign rule and DMRG acceleration,  arXiv:cond-mat/9804231
      (1998),  arXiv:cond-mat/9804231.

[59]R. F. Bishop, D. J. J. Farnell and J. B. Parkinson,        Sign  rules  for  anisotropic  quantum
      spin systems,  Phys. Rev. B 61(10), 6775 (2000),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.61.6775.

[60]W. Marshall,        Antiferromagnetism, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A.
      Mathematical and Physical Sciences 232(1188), 48 (1955),  doi:10.1098/rspa.1955.0200.

[61]S.-i. Amari,        Natural Gradient Works Eﬃciently in Learning, Neural Computation 10(2),
      251 (1998),  doi:10.1162/089976698300017746.


















                                                          29