Explainable Natural Language Processing with
Matrix Product States

                   Jirawat Tangpanitanon1,2,†, Chanatip Mangkang3,†, Pradeep
                   Bhadola4, Yuichiro Minato5, Dimitris G. Angelakis6,7, Thiparat
                   Chotibut3,∗
                   1 Quantum Technology Foundation (Thailand), Bangkok, Thailand
                   2 Thailand Center of Excellence in Physics, Ministry of Higher Education, Science,
                   Research and Innovation, Bangkok, Thailand
                   3 Chula Intelligent and Complex Systems, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science,
                   Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
                   4 Centre for Theoretical Physics & Natural Philosophy, Nakhonsawan Studiorum for
                   Advanced Studies, Mahidol University, Nakhonsawan Campus, Thailand
                   5 Blueqat Inc., Japan
                   6 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete,
                   Chania, Greece
                   7 Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore

                   E-mail:  thiparatc@gmail.com,  thiparat.c@chula.ac.th
                   †  Equal  contributions
                   *  Corresponding  author

                   7 April 2022

                   Abstract.    Despite  empirical  successes  of  recurrent  neural  networks  (RNNs)  in
                   natural language processing (NLP), theoretical understanding of RNNs is still limited
                   due  to  intrinsically  complex  non-linear  computations.    We  systematically  analyze
                   RNNs’ behaviors in a ubiquitous NLP task, the sentiment analysis of movie reviews, via
                   the mapping between a class of RNNs called recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs) and a
                   matrix product state (MPS). Using the von-Neumann entanglement entropy (EE) as a
                   proxy for information propagation, we show that single-layer RACs possess a maximum
                   information propagation capacity, reﬂected by the saturation of the EE. Enlarging the
                   bond dimension beyond the EE saturation threshold does not increase model prediction
                   accuracies, so a minimal model that best estimates the data statistics can be inferred.
                   Although  the  saturated  EE  is  smaller  than  the  maximum  EE  allowed  by  the  area
                   law, our minimal model still achieves∼ 99% training accuracies in realistic sentiment
                   analysis data sets.  Thus, low EE is not a warrant against the adoption of single-layer
                   RACs for NLP. Contrary to a common belief that long-range information propagation
                   is the main source of RNNs’ successes, we show that single-layer RACs harness high
                   expressiveness from the subtle interplay between the information propagation and the
                   word vector embeddings.  Our work sheds light on the phenomenology of learning in
                   RACs,  and more generally on the explainability of RNNs for NLP, using tools from
                   many-body quantum physics.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           2

Keywords:   Matrix  Product  State,  Entanglement  Entropy,  Entanglement  Spectrum,
Quantum   Machine   Learning,   Natural   Language   Processing,   Sequence   Modeling,
Recurrent Neural Networks

1.  Introduction

The  study  of  many-body  quantum  physics  prompts  the  development  of  theoretical
and  numerical  techniques  to  compactly  represent  and  analyze  quantum  states  living
in  an  exponentially  large  Hilbert  space.   One  of  the  most  prominent  examples  is  a
compact representation of a ground state of a one-dimensional gapped quantum lattice
system  with  local  interaction  as  a  matrix  product  state  (MPS),  which  can  eﬃciently
parametrize an appropriate ground state using resources that grow only linearly with
the system size [1].  Compact representations generalizing MPS to higher dimensional
systems  include  projected  entangled  pair  state  (PEPS)  [2],  multiscale  entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA), which eﬃciently parametrize critical high-dimensional
systems [3], and, more generally, tensor network (TN) states [4].  These compact state
representations drastically reduce the number of parameters from exponential to at most
polynomial in the system size, rendering the analysis and the simulation of many-body
quantum  systems  computationally  tractable.    Dimensionality  reduction  has  enabled
insights into a broad range of many-body quantum phenomena, ranging from quantum
phase transitions to topological phases of matter.
     On  the  other  hand,  machine  learning  (ML)  has  also  beneﬁtted  from  algorithms
that  extract  a  compact  representation  of  complex  data  of  interests.    In  supervised
machine learning, many algorithms eﬃciently convert a gigantic set of data-label pair
{(Xi,li)}, where Xi∈ Rd  is the ith  data vector and li  is the scalar label of that data
vector, into a compact representation encoding the relationship between data-label as
a  conditional  probability P (l|X,θ)  parametrized  by  a  set  of  parameters θ.  With  the
advent of deep learning (DL), a modern paradigm of ML that imitates computational
models of biological neural networks, probabilistic relationships between data-label pairs
as complex and extensive as picture-name matching, sound-text pairing, or text-speech
generation,  can  be  eﬃciently  represented  [5].   In  fact,  the  ability  of  DL  to  extract
a  compact  representation  of  complex  data  has  fueled  modern  artiﬁcial  intelligence
technologies, including image recognition, speech recognition, and language translation,
to name a few.
     Since many-body quantum physics and supervised ML both beneﬁt from a compact
representation of high-dimensional mathematical objects, applying successful techniques
from one discipline to the other has led to a fruitful cross-fertilization.  For example,
variational  ansatz  based  on  artiﬁcial  neural  networks  oﬀers  a  useful,  though  less
interpretable, representation of complex many-body quantum states [6,7,8].  Automatic
classiﬁcation of quantum phases of matter also beneﬁts from supervised ML approaches
[9].  In the opposite direction,  techniques from many-body quantum physics can oﬀer
novel computational paradigms for supervised ML. References [10,11,12,13] propose
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           3

tensor  networks  as  a  quantum-inspired  supervised  ML  ansatz  that  can  achieve  high
performance in image recognition tasks. Furthermore, entanglement entropy in quantum
tensor  networks  can  shed  light  on  the  information  propagation  in  the  dual  artiﬁcial
neural networks [14,15].  Such duality between quantum tensor networks and artiﬁcial
neural  networks  can  help  scientists  scrutinize  the  inner  working  of  complex  neural
network algorithms, providing new tools to tackle the explainability aspects of black-box
DL approaches.  Recent work applies quantum techniques to tackle the explainability of
image recognition tasks [12], though the analysis for realistic natural language processing
(NLP) tasks is still lacking.
     With  the  goal  of  investigating  the  inner  working  of  DL  in  NLP,  we  study  the
behaviors of single-layer recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs), a class of recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) that can be mapped to an MPS [14], in a ubiquitous NLP task, the
sentiment analysis of movie reviews.  The objective of sentiment analysis is to classify
each written review into an appropriate category such as ‘like’ or ‘dislike’. We show that,
by using the entanglement entropy (EE) of the dual MPS as a measure of information
propagation  in  the  networks,  single-layer  RACs  achieve  highest  prediction  accuracies
when  the  information  propagation  saturates.   By  saturation  we  mean  there  exists  a
critical  model  size χ∗  (measured  by  the  number  of  hidden  neurons)  such  that  larger
models have prediction accuracies and the EE as high as those of the model with size
χ∗.   Thus,  there  is  a  minimal  single-layer  RACs  model  that  can  best  estimate  the
statistics of sentiment analysis data.  The prediction accuracies are excellent though the
saturated EE is below the maximum EE restricted by the area law of an MPS.
     In NLP, another crucial component of successful DL models is a word embedding,
a  vector  representation  of  a  word  that  encapsulates  word  semantics.   While  the  EE
analysis reveals the behaviors of information propagation within single-layer RACs, it
disregards  the  role  of  word  embedding.   In  this  work,  we  also  analyze  the  interplay
between  information  propagation  and  the  word  embedding.   We  report  that,  with  a
trainable word embedding, single-layer RACs can achieve higher prediction accuracies
at  a  smaller  EE,  compared  to  those  of  a  model  with  a  ﬁxed  embedding.   As  the  EE
drops  down  from  its  maximum  value  to  saturation  as  the  model  size  increases,  the
word embedding becomes more meaningful (as measured by the behavior of the cosine
similarity between word vector representations.)  Hence, single-layer RACs have a trade-
oﬀ between achieving long-range information propagation and attaining a meaningful
word embedding in sentiment analysis tasks.
     Although  a  long-range  correlation  in  an  MPS  is  bounded  above  by  the  area  law
[16], our results demonstrate that an MPS can still serve as a useful variational ansatz
in a realistic NLP task, provided the input word embedding is well designed.  Recently,
tensor network models for sequence modeling have been proposed [17,18,19,20,21];
however, most work focus on setting up new TN-based variational ansatz that may not
have an exact mapping to the RNNs counterpart.  Albeit interesting, these models do
not meet our goal to scrutinize the inner working of RNNs.
     The manuscript is organized as follow.  We begin with a self-contained background
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           4

on  a  probabilistic  sequence  modeling  and  statistical  language  modeling  in  section2.
Sequence modeling in the era of RNNs and how to represent a word meaningfully as
a  vector  are  provided  in  sections2.1-2.2.   The  mapping  between  RACs  and  MPS  as
well  as  the  meaning  of  entanglement  entropy  as  a  proxy  for  information  propagation
are  discussed  in  section2.3.   Section3reports  numerical  methods  and  the  results  of
RACs  performance  on  sentiment  analysis  for  the  IMDb  data  set,  a  standard  movie
review data set, revealing the information propagation capacity in RACs.  Comments
on  RACs’  behaviors  and  the  role  of  word  embedding  are  provided  in  details  in  the
same section.  Similar results for a smaller movie review data set (Rotten Tomatoes)
are reported in the Appendix.  Finally, we conclude with the discussion and outlook in
section4.

2.  Statistical language modeling with RNNs and MPS

Since language is a sequential phenomenon, in which a sequence of words (or alphabets)
dictates  its  meaning,  we  ﬁrst  review  a  statistical  approach  to  model  sequences.   A
central  mathematical  object  for  statistical  sequence  modeling  is  the  joint  probability
distribution P (X1:T )≡ P (X1,X2,...,XT )  where  a  discrete  random  variable Xt  with
t∈{1,...,T} can take a valuext from a ﬁnite setSN withN elements.  One can regard
the list of correlated random variablesX1:T  as a discrete time-series.  Using Bayes’ rules,
the  joint  distribution  can  be  factorized  into  the  product  of  conditional  probabilities,
conditioned on the knowledge of the past, as

                  P (X1:T ) =P (X1)P (X2|X1)P (X3|X1:2)···P (XT|X1:T−1),           (1)

where X1:t   denotes   the   sequence   of   random   variables   in   the   ﬁrst t   steps;   i.e.
X1:t≡  (X1,X2,...,Xt).   However,  given  a  time  series  data,  inferring  the  conditional
distribution P (XT|X1:T−1)  from  occurrence  frequency  of  a  long  data  sequence  can
be impractical, as each realization X1:T−1  = (x1,x2,...,xT−1) typically occurs with a
relative  frequency∼ N 1−T  (assuming Xt  is  uniformly  distributed  over SN),  which  is
exponentially small in T .
     One  may  assume  a  short  temporal  correlation  in  the  sequence,  so  that  the
conditional probabilities depend only on the n previous steps
                  P (XT|X1:T−1)≈P (XT|XT−n:T−1).                                                    (2)
For  a  small n,  a  realization XT−n:T−1  =  (xT−n,...,xT−1)  now  occurs  with  a  non-
negligible frequency∼N−n≫N 1−T , rendering the estimation of (2) manageable.  For
n = 1, (2) is the familiar Markov assumption, which gives a Markovian approximation
of a stochastic process X1:T  in (1) .
     In  the  context  of  natural  language  processing  (NLP),  a  probabilistic  model  that
prescribes probabilities to sequences of words (or alphabets) is called a language model
[22].  Predicting the next word (or alphabet),  given a sequence of previous words (or
alphabets) is one important example with myriad applications.  A model that predicts
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           5


















                  Figure  1.   A  schematic  for  the  sentiment  analysis  (binary  classiﬁcation)  of  a  word
                  sequencew1:T  performed by a vanilla recurrent neural network (RNN), which outputs
                  the probability that the sequence has a positive sentiment σ∈ [0, 1].  Each word wt is
                  embedded as a vector Φ(wt)∈ RdI , withdI of around 300-500 for other large language
                  modeling tasks [24,25]. The recurrent computation is iterated from a dynamical system
                  ht = f(W Hht−1,W IΦ (wt))∈ RdH, with some non-linear map (activation function)
                  f  : RdH× RdI → RdH.   In  the  last  time  step t  = T ,  when  sentiment  classiﬁcation
                  is performed,  one computes the sigmoid function σ(WOhT +bO) which assigns the
                  probability that the sequence w1:T  has a positive sentiment.


the next word based only on the last n− 1 words according to (2) is called an     n-gram
language model.
      However,  even with a small n = 4,  constructing a  4-gram model from a gigantic
text, such as all the Wikipedia’s english articles, can be impractical.  Consider a random
variableXt in (1) which now takes a realization as a word  wt fromSN, a dictionary with
N  words.  Oxford English dictionary contains N  = 171, 476≈ 105  English words that
are currently used [23].  In this case, the frequency of occurrence of a sequence of 4 words
(wt−4,wt−3,wt−2,wt−1) can be vanishingly small∼ N−4≈ (105)−4  = 10−20, rendering
the  estimation  of P (Xt | Xt−4:t−1)  impractical.   In  addition,  accurate  prediction  of
the next word often depends on the words that appear in the far past.  For instance,
the  prediction  accounting  for  the  subject-verb  agreement  in  “This  example  that  we
demonstrate for you            ” can be syntactically wrong if the model retains only the last
few words, whose prediction would be “are”.  It requires a 7-gram model to correctly
predict “is” in this example.  Therefore, to construct a useful language model, one needs
to devise a computational approach that can encapsulate a long-range correlation in a
sequence of words,  while also circumventing the sparsity of a long sequence problem.
This can be achieved with recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which we now discuss.

2.1.  Statistical language modelling with RNNs

Rather  than  conditioning  the  prediction  task  on  a  window  of  size n  as  in  an  n-gram
language  model,  RNNs  allow  conditioning  the  prediction  on  all  previous  words  that
appear in a text, approximating (1) while requiring only ﬁnite computational resources.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           6

RNNs can also perform the next item prediction as it is widely used to estimate the
conditional probabilityP (XT|X1:T−1); however, one ubiquitous yet simpler task in NLP
is to estimate P (σ|w1:T ), where σ  is a discrete quantity that characterizes a sequence
of  words w1:T  of  length T .   We  will  focus  on  characterizing  the  sentiment  of  written
sentences, a task termed sentiment analysis in NLP, in whichσ is a binary variable that
takes a value 0 if a given sequence has a negative sentiment, and a value 1 if a given
sequence has a positive sentiment.  This task can be used, for example, to automatically
rate product reviews or analyze news sentiment.
     We now describe the simplest (Elman’s/vanilla) RNN that is typically adopted to
approximate conditional probabilities.  Figure1shows a recurrent computational unit
that estimatesP (σ|w1:T ).  At every time step, except the ﬁrst and the last, this recurrent
computational unit computes from an input Φ(wt) of dimensiondI and a hidden or latent
vector ht−1 of dimensiondH a non-linear output functionf, called output hidden vector
ht of dimension dH,

                 ht≡f(WIΦ(wt),WHht−1,b).                                                              (3)

HereWI is the input weight matrix with dimensiondH×dI that aggregate signals from
the  input  vector Φ(wt)  , WH  is  the  weight  matrix  aggregating  the  signals  from  the
hidden vector whose dimension is dH×dH, and b is the so called bias with dimension
dH.  The non-linear activation  function f  imitates the behaviors of biological neurons,
such  that  the  weighted  input  and  the  weighted  hidden  vector  are  summed  together
(mimicking  aggregation  of  potentials),  while  the  bias  (representing  the  background
neuron’s potential) is added to the aggregated weighted sum.  In Elman’s RNNs, each
component s(i)t   of the aggregated sum st =WIΦ(wt) +WHht−1 + b represents a total
potential each hidden neuron i∈{1,...,dH} experiences, which triggers each hidden
neuron to be activated and outputs a corresponding component of the hidden vector into
the next time step as h(i)t   =f(s(i)t  ). The notation in the last equality and (3) signiﬁes that
the same activation function f  is applied identically to every hidden neuron.  Standard
non-linear  activation  function f  motivated  by  neurobiology  is  a  sigmoid  function  or
tanh function, whereas modern machine learning typically employs rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU) deﬁned by f(x) = Max{0,x} and its variants [5,26].
     With  (3)  as  a  computational  building  block,  one  can  iterate  the  computation
recursively taking into account all the inputs in the sequence Φ1:T≡ (Φ(w1),..., Φ(wT ))
of size T , provided a hidden vector h0 was initialized.  Due to the recursive structure,
it’s plausible that information in the far past can inﬂuence the output vector at the last
step hT .  This manifestation of long-term temporal dependencies through a recursive
computation circumvents the problem of an astronomical number of parameters needed
to model a long sequence encountered in the previous section.  Here one only requires to
store the bias vector b of dimensiondH,WI of dimensiondH×dI, andWH of dimension
dH×dH, all of which are independent of the sequence length T .
     The simplest sentiment analysis task, which we focus on, is a binary classiﬁcation
task  where  there  are  only  2  sentiments σ ∈ {0, 1}.   In  such  case,  the  ﬁnal  hidden
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           7

vector  will  be  passed  to  the  classiﬁcation  neuron  with  the  output  weight WO  whose
dimension is 1×dH  together with the added scalar bias bO as the aggregated signal of
the classiﬁcation neuron sO  = WOhT  +bO  before the classiﬁcation neuron predicts a
number ˆσθ∈ [0, 1] computed from the sigmoid activation function

                  ˆσθ≡           11 + exp(−sO),                                                                               (4)

where we denote the set of all parameters in this RNN that inﬂuences the value of this
last neuron as θ≡{b,WI,WH,WO,bO}.
     To train the model, one adjusts parameters θ≡{b,WI,WH,WO,bO} to minimize
the cost (loss) functionC which accumulates the amount of mismatches between the true
sentiment σ(wm) associated with the mth  sequence wm≡ w1:T,m  = (w1,w2,...,wT )m
and the RNNs’ sentiment prediction  ˆσθ(wm), for all sequences in the training sample
m∈{1,...,M}.  For a binary classiﬁcation task with the probabilistic prediction given
by (4), the cost function is typically taken as the binary cross-entropy

                             M∑  (                                                                   )
                 C≡  1M            σ(wm) log [ˆσθ(wm)] + (1−σ(wm)) log [1− ˆσθ(wm)]                   .    (5)
                            m=1
In  a  movie  review  task,  for  example, M  can  be  the  number  of  written  reviews  with
predetermined  sentiments  from M  diﬀerent  reviewers  that  encapsulates  a  reasonable
relationship between word sequences and their associated sentiments.
     Note  that  minimizing  the  cross-entropy C ≡ HRNNθ (P )  between  the  empirical
distributionP (σ|w1:T ) constructed from the training data and the distribution predicted
by the RNN parametrized byθ, denoted byRNNθ(σ|w1:T ), is equivalent to minimizing
the  KL  divergence DKL (P||RNNθ)  [27, 28].   Since  the  KL  divergence  reﬂects  the
dissimilarity between the two distributions, the optimization (minimization) procedure
of the cost function (5) would search for a vanilla RNN parametrized by  θ∗ that estimates
well the empirical distributionP (σ|w1:T ). Provided the training data is properly curated
and  the  optimization  procedure  (e.g.,  gradient  methods  and  their  modern  variants
[26, 5])  is  reliable,  one  shall  arrive  at  a  reasonable  statistical  relationship  between  a
long sequence of words and its associated sentiment parametrized by an RNN with a
ﬁnite number of parameters θ∗.  In other words,
                 P (σ|w1:T )≈RNNθ∗(σ|w1:T ).                                                                (6)
This is the main philosophy behind statistical language modeling using recurrent neural
networks.

2.2.  On the word vector embedding Φ
Suppose  one  randomly  assigns  or  ‘tokenizes’  each  word  with  a  unique  integer wi ∈
{1,...,N},  where  1≤ i≤ N  with N  being  the  size  of  the  dictionary.   Then  each
written review is represented by a sequence of integers w1:T  = (w1,...,wT ).  Here, the
length of each review is forced to be T , by padding 0’s at the beginning of the review
if its length is less than T , or by selecting only the ﬁrst T  words if its length is greater
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           8

than T .   For  example,  for T  =  6,  the  sentence  ‘Physics  is  beautiful’  can  be  encoded
as w1:T  = (0, 0, 0, 532, 3, 46),  where ‘Physics’= 532,  ‘is’= 3,  and ‘beautiful’= 46.  The
tokenization process, however, artiﬁcially introduces the notion of distance between two
words that does not encode word semantics.
     How shall one mathematically represent words so that their semantics are encoded?
A widely-adopted solution is to embed a wordw as a vector Φ(w)∈ RdI. By representing
a  word  as  a  vector  embedded  in dI  dimensions,  words  with  similar  meanings  that
co-occur  frequently  in  the  same  context  can  be  assigned  unique  vectors  such  that
their  pairwise  Euclidean  distance  are  small.   Also,  a  negative  cosine  similarity  of  the
embeddings of the two words wa,wb computed from

                 sim (Φ(wa), Φ(wb)) =    Φ(wa)||Φ(wa)||2·   Φ(wb)||Φ(wb)||2                                         (7)

can signify that wa and wb rarely co-occur in the same context, and hence could have
opposite meanings.
     There  are  a  few  methods  to  numerically  obtain  an  embedding  Φ  that  eﬀectively
represents word semantics [24,25,29]. A simple yet classic Word2vec method [24], which
is also adopted in our numerical experiments, is to assign the embedding function Φ as a
matrix of sizedI×N, so that theith column of Φ corresponds to the word vector Φ(wi)
of the wordwi.  The embedding dimensiondI is a hyper-parameter that can be tuned to
best suit the problem.  The matrix elements in Φ are treated as variational parameters
to be optimized along with the optimization of the RNN for a language modeling task
of interests.  For example, to perform a sentiment analysis using a vanilla RNN without
knowing a  priori the embedding matrix, one would add the matrix elements of Φ into
the trainable parameters  ˜θ≡{θ, Φ} ={b,WI,WH,WO,bO, Φ}. In this way,  training
the RNN according to section2.1will not only yield the network parameters, but also
the word vector embedding.  With a suﬃciently large and well curated training data set,
one expects that the embedding matrix Φ would eﬀectively encapsulate word semantics
in the dictionary of interests.
     Despite the empirical success of statistical language modeling using vanilla RNNs
together  with  the  well-trained  word  embedding  as  explained  above,  highly-nonlinear
iterations  of  (3)  by  standard  activation  functions  render  the  analysis  of  how  RNNs
approximate  empirical  sequence  distributions  very  challenging.   In  the  following,  we
review recent attempts to analyze the expressiveness of RNNs (i.e.  the set of function
that  can  be  eﬀectively  parametrized  by  RNNs)  with  a  speciﬁc  activation  function,
through the mapping to their dual the tensor network counterparts.

2.3.  Recurrent Arithmetic Circuit (RAC) and the mapping to Matrix Product State
(MPS)

Consider the activation function deﬁned by the Hadamard product
                 fRAC(a,b) = a⊙ b,                                                                               (8)
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                           9
































                  Figure 2.  The graphical representation of the mapping between a single-layer RACs
                  for  sentiment  analysis  task  (a)  to  the  dual  MPS  (b).   As  a  fundamental  building
                  block, the translational invariant MPS (without the contraction by boundary vector
                  h0) consists of the rank-3 tensorAstαtαt−1≡∑dH˜αt−1,˜st=1WH˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜stWI˜stst, where
                  the triangle in (c) represents the tensor of rank 3 deﬁned by δjkl  which is equal to 1
                  if j =k =l and is 0 otherwise.  The structure of the building block in (c) arises from
                  the Hadamard product imposed by RAC activation function in (a).  Here we denote χ
                  as the bond dimension of the MPS, which is equal to dH, the number of hidden units
                  of RACs in (a).  The vertical bond in (c) has the dimension dI, identical to that of the
                  word vector embedding Φ.


which  is  the  element-wise  multiplication f (i)RAC(a,b) ≡  a(i)· b(i).    Recurrent  neural
networks  with  RAC  activation  function,  known  as  Recurrent  Arithmetic  Circuits
(RACs), have recently received increasing attention and share computational paradigm
similar  to  the  Multiplicative  Recurrent  Neural  Networks  [30, 31, 32, 33].     More
importantly,  references  [15, 14]  show  that  a  single-layer  RAC  can  be  mapped  to  the
dual Matrix Product State (MPS), taking the inspiration from the Tensor Train (TT)
decomposition  of  [34].    By  studying  RACs,  the  analysis  of  learning  in  RNNs  for
temporal data can thus be performed from many-body quantum physics perspectives.
For instance, one can compute the entanglement entropy of the dual MPS, which is a
measure of the amount of temporal correlation that can be supported by the network
[15, 14].    The  larger  the  entanglement  entropy  means  that  the  output  of  network
computation crucially depends on the temporal data in the further past, enabling the
network to have a longer-range memory.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         10

      The tensor network diagrams in ﬁgure2summarize the equivalence between the
computation  of  the  standard  RNNs-based  sentiment  analysis  with  RAC  activation
function  and  that  of  the  dual  matrix  product  state.   By  deﬁning  the  tensor  of  rank
3 of the form
                                   dH∑
                  Astαtαt−1≡              WH˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜stWI˜stst,                                              (9)
                               ˜αt−1,˜st=1
where δjkl  is 1  if j  = k  = l  and is  0 otherwise,  the state evolution by  one time step
can be computed by the tensor contraction between the hidden vector ht−1, the tensor
Astαtαt−1, and the input word vector Φ(wt), resulting in the tensor of rank 1 describing
the hidden vector of the next time step whose component αt is given by

                              dH∑    dI∑
                  h(αt)t     =           h(αt−1)t−1 Astαtαt−1Φ(st)(wt)
                            αt−1=1  st=1
                                  dH∑      dH∑    dI∑ (                      )            (                   )
                           =                            WH˜αt−1αt−1h(αt−1)t−1  δαt ˜αt−1˜st WI˜ststΦ(st)(wt)
                               ˜αt−1,˜st=1αt−1=1 st=1
                           =(WHht−1)(αt)·(WIΦ(wt))(αt)
                           =f (αt)RAC(WHht−1,WIΦ(wt)).
      Therefore, given a sequence (Φ(w1),..., Φ(wT )) and the initialization of the hidden
vector h0 with dimensiondH, the output hidden vector at timeT can be computed from
the contraction between the translational invariant MPS
                                        dH∑
                  ΨsT...s2s1αTα0 ≡                AsTαTαT−1···As2α2α1As1α1α0,                                 (10)
                                 α1,α2,...,αT−1=1
the tensor of rank T  constructed from the input sequence
                  ΦsT...s2s1≡ Φ(sT )(wT )··· Φ(s2)(w2)Φ(s1)(w1),                                       (11)
and the initial hidden vector h0 as follows
                              dH∑       dI∑                               )h(α0)
                  h(αT )T     =                 (ΦsT...s2s1)(ΨsT...s2s1αTα0   0  .                              (12)
                             α0=1 s1,s2,...,sT =1
The  last  equality  is  compactly  represented  by  the  standard  tensor  network  graphical
notation as shown in ﬁgure2(b), whose building block is the tensor     A of (9) represented
graphically in ﬁgure2(c).  For sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation, the ﬁnal
contraction (12) will then be used to compute the probability that the input sequence
w1:T  has a positive sentiment through the usual sigmoid activation function as in (4).
Note that, in many-body quantum physics language, the dimension of the hidden unit
dH  is in fact the bond dimension χ≡dH  of the MPS.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         11

2.4.  Entanglement entropy of the MPS as a proxy for information propagation in RAC

Since the fundamental building block of the computation is the translational invariant
MPS, we can compute the entanglement entropy (EE) by partitioning the MPS into two
subsystems  through  the  standard  Schmidt-decomposition,  and  compute  the  resulting
von-Neumann entropy [35].  However, the MPS in (10) still has an open boundary.  To
make the boundary close and properly compute the EE, one needs to contract the indices
α0, and αT  by vectors of dimension χ =dH.  In the limit T≫ 1, this choice of vectors
should not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the EE if the partition is made at half of the chain.  The
details on an appropriate choice of vectors for contraction to close the boundary in our
numerical experiments will be discussed in the following section.  Suppose now that the
contraction has been properly made and the MPS with a close boundary is given by
˜ΨsT...s2s1, then the corresponding quantum state of the MPS is

                                   dI∑
                 | ˜Ψ⟩MPS =               ˜ΨsT...s2s1|sT⟩⊗...⊗|s2⟩⊗|s1⟩,                             (13)

                               s1,...,sT =1
which has the Schmidt decomposition (singular value decomposition) for the bipartition
at the⌈T/2⌉th bond into the left and right sectors as
                                 r∑        ⟩⊗⏐⏐φRi   ⟩,                                                              (14)
                 | ˜Ψ⟩MPS =         λi⏐⏐φLi
                               i=1
where the Schmidt coeﬃcients λi’s are the real, non-negative singular values satisfying
∑r
   i=1λ2i  = 1, and r is the Schmidt rank (Schmidt number).  The Schmidt rank r is 1
only for a product state and is greater than 1 when a state has the two subsystems that
are entangled.
     The von-Neumann (entanglement) entropy is a well-deﬁned measure of entangle-
ment between the two subsystems and can be calculated as
                            r∑
                 S =−          λ2i log2λ2i.                                                                            (15)
                           i=1
Importantly,  this  entanglement  entropy,  when  translated  into  the  recurrent  neural
network language, can quantify the amount of temporal correlation between the signal
in the earlier times{h1,...,h⌈T/2⌉} and the signal in the later times{h⌈T/2⌉+1,...,hT},
also known as Start-End separation rank [36,14]. If the entanglement entropy is zero, the
signals in the earlier and the later times are statistically independent.  The prediction
task  from  models  with  vanishing  EE  thus  has  a  short-term  memory,  neglecting  the
knowledge in the past t <⌈T/2⌉.  One then would expect the models with larger EE
to be more desirable in encapsulating long-range sequence correlations.  We shall then
intuitively interpret the EE computed from (15) as      the proxy for information propagation
in  the  RACs  networks.   RACs  that  possess  low  EE  might  have  a  low  expressiveness
(high bias in statistical learning theory framework), and thus are unable to eﬃciently
approximate data distribution with long-range statistical correlations.
     It’s well known that an MPS obeys the area law of entanglement entropy, which
constrains the upper bound on EE as S = O(log2(χ)) [37].  In fact, the state with the
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         12

maximum  entropy  in  (15)  is  attained  with  the  value  log       2(χ)  when  all  the  Schmidt
coeﬃcients  are  identically  1/√χ  with  the  Schmidt  rank r  = χ.‡    Since  the  upper
bound is independent of the system size T ,  temporal data with long-range statistical
correlation might not be eﬃciently approximated by an MPS (or, equivalently, single-
layer  RACs)  variational  ansatz.   This  result  seems  to  warrant  a  no-go  statement  for
using MPS to model sequential data with long-range correlation.  Alternative models
that can incorporate long-range correlation, such as Deep RACs, have been theoretically
analyzed,  though  no  experimental  results  on  these  network  performance  on  realistic
temporal data sets have been reported [14,15,36].
     However,  thus  far,  the  analysis  on  the  expressive  power  of  single-layer  RACs
concerns  only  that  of  the  recurrent  units,  not  of  the  combined  system  that  includes
a  representation  Φ  of  the  input  embedding.    In  practice,  even  in  simple  RNNs,
incorporating trainable word embedding function Φ into the model can tremendously
increase the prediction accuracy. In the following section, we shall investigate, in realistic
sequence modeling settings, whether low EE of models alone suﬃces to enforce a no-go
theorem for such models.  The answer is an aﬃrmative no, and single-layer RACs are
still useful in realistic sequence modeling tasks.

3.  Sentiment analysis by single-layer RACs with an entanglement entropy
below the area law:  numerical experiments

In this section, we ﬁrst provide the details of our numerical experiments to analyze the
behaviors  of  single-layer  RACs  for  sentiment  analysis  in  realistic  movie  reviews  data
sets.  Then, we discuss the importance of additive biases in RAC activation function,
and  elucidate  how  to  convert  RACs  with  additive  biases  into  MPS  for  the  purpose
of entanglement entropy analysis.  We then report the behaviors of single-layer RACs
together  with  their  entanglement  entropy.   First,  we  show  that  when  a  pre-trained
word  vector  embedding Φ  is  ﬁxed,  the  prediction  accuracies  strongly  correlate  with
the amount of information propagation within RACs as measured by the entanglement
entropy.  Interestingly, the high prediction accuracies saturate when the entanglement
entropy  saturates,  enabling  one  to  determine  the  minimal  model  (model  with  the
smallest  bond  dimension χ∗  that  saturates  the  entanglement  entropy)  that  can  best
approximate the statistics of sequential data.  This entanglement entropy saturation is
a reﬂection of the convergence of entanglement spectrum to the limiting entanglement
spectrum that we numerically report. Second, when the embedding layer is trained along
with RACs, there is an intriguing interplay between RACs and the embedding layer such
that,  even when the entanglement entropy drops,  the prediction accuracy is boosted.
Contrary to a common belief that long-range information propagation in the network
is the main source of RNN’s expressiveness, we show that, when the bond dimension is
large, RACs harness its high expressiveness from meaningful word embeddings.

‡  The discrete distribution Pi that maximizes the Shannon’s entropy−∑mi=1Pi log2Pi is the uniform
distribution Pi = 1/m.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         13

3.1.  Details of the numerical experiments

In the main text, we use the IMDb movies and critic reviews data set, which is one of the
standard data sets for sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation [38].  The training
set and the test set containM = 40,000 and 10,000 diﬀerent samples respectively.  Both
sets are approximately balanced: the ratio of positive to negative reviews in the training
and the test set are given by, respectively, 20,027:19,973 and 4,913:5,027.  The length of
each review is set to T  = 50 and the dictionary size is N  = 10, 000.  We also perform
sentiment analysis on the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) data set using the same methodology
which leads to similar conclusions as the ones presented in this section.  The details and
the results for RT data sets are shown in the Appendix.
     To train the model,  we implement single-layer RACs using Keras [39] which is a
high-level  API  of  TensorFlow.   Batch  training  is  deployed  with  200  epochs  with  the
batch size of 128.  An early stopping is applied to terminate the training process if the
change in the cost function after 4 epochs is smaller than 0.001.  The cost function is
optimized using Adam optimizer.  The optimization process is repeated 50 times, each
with a random initialization of the variational parameters, and the averaged prediction
accuracies for the training and the test data set are obtained for each number of hidden
neurons dH.

3.2.  Entanglement entropy of single-layer RACs with additive biases
It  is  important  to  note  that  for  RACs  not  to  suﬀer  from  the  vanishing  or  exploding
gradient problem during model training§, we found that it is crucial to add trainable
bias vectors bH,bI∈ Rχ  to the aggregated inputs of the RAC activation function.  In
particular, to achieve model trainability in practice requires the time evolution of the
form ht ≡ fRAC(WIΦ(wt) + bI,WHht−1 + bH).  Fortunately,  recasting  the  recurrent
computation  with  additive  bias  vectors  as  the  MPS  structure  only  requires  a  minor
modiﬁcation to the prescriptions in the previous section, which we now discuss.
     Deﬁne the new input and hidden weight matrices as
                          [                ]  }                      [                 ] }
                   ˜WI≡        WI      bI       χ + 1,      ˜WH≡         WH       bH       χ + 1.          (16)
                          |  0... 0{z   1   }                        |  0... 0{z   1    }

                                 dI+1                                        χ+1
Deﬁne also the new word vector embedding and the new hidden vector[][]
                  ˜Φ(wt)≡        Φ(wt)      ,      ˜ht≡    ht     .                                                 (17)
                                    1                       1

§  Since RACs iteratively multiply signals, backpropagation during gradient computation can lead to the
iterated product of very small numbers or very large numbers for poorly initialized training parameters,
leading to vanishing or exploding gradients problem respectively.  Adding a trainable bias is a way to
control  the  scale  of  multiplicative  iteration  and  help  mitigate  the  vanishing  or  exploding  gradients
problem.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         14


















                  Figure  3.   (a)  The  modiﬁed  translational  invariant  MPS  in  a  close  boundary  for
                  calculating the entanglement entropy of RACs with additive biases bI,bH.  (b) The
                  tensor  ˜Astαtαt−1  is deﬁned according to (20), which consists of the contraction between
                  δjkl and the modiﬁed weight matrices  ˜WH,  ˜WI  of (16).


These deﬁnitions give
                                   [                      ]                    [                   ]
                   ˜WI ˜Φ(wt) =       WIΦ(wt) + bI           ,      ˜WH ˜ht =     WHht + bH          .         (18)
                                               1                                         1

Therefore,                                                     [                                                    ]
                  ˜ht =  ( ˜WH ˜ht−1)      ( ˜WI ˜Φ(wt))           fRAC(WHht−1 + bH,WIΦ(wt) + bI)
                                        ⊙                   =                             1                           .(19)

The last equality states that the time evolution from RAC with the bias vectors of the
original problem can be encoded into the time evolution from standard RAC (without
additive biases) in one higher dimension, resulting in the translational invariant MPS
with the following tensor as a building block

                                   χ+1∑
                   ˜Astαtαt−1≡             ˜WH˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜st ˜WI˜stst,                                            (20)

                                ˜αt−1,˜st=1
where the input index st now takes the value from{1,...,χ + 1}.
      After  we  obtain  all  the  variational  parameters  including bI,bH  at  the  end  of  a
training  procedure  with  Adam  optimizer,   ˜Astαtαt−1  that  deﬁnes  the  MPS/TT  with  an
open boundary can be constructed.  The entanglement entropy is computed according
to section2.4, where we close the left and the right boundary by the contraction with
the boundary vectors ˜ωL, ˜ωR∈ Rχ+1 deﬁned by[]         [     ]
                  ˜ωL≡ ˜h0 =         0    ,     ˜ωR≡       1    .                                                     (21)
                                     1                     1

˜ωL  is chosen as the left boundary vector because the initial hidden vector h0 fed into
vanilla RNNs is typically chosen to be a zero vector, whereas ˜ωR is chosen as the right
boundary vector to ensure that all the output components are taken into account.  But,
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         15


















                  Figure 4.  The behaviors of trained RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis
                  of  the  IMDb  data  set,  when  the  ﬁxed  pre-trained  word  embedding  has  dimension
                  dI  =  4.   (Left)  the  prediction  accuracies  saturate  when  the  entanglement  entropy
                  (EE) saturates.  The critical bond dimension χ∗≈ 20, at which the EE is maximal,
                  enables one to infer a minimal single-layer RACs model for IMDb sentiment analysis.
                  The average maximum entanglement entropy  ¯Smax, which is below the upper bound
                  from  the  area  law,  is  attained  when χ  & χ∗.    (Right)  above  the  critical  bond
                  dimension, the Schmidt coeﬃcients collapse onto the limiting entanglement spectrum
                   ¯λ∗i  that  sets  the  slowest  exponential  decay  rate  of  the  Schmidt  coeﬃcients.   Here,
                  the average maximum Schmidt coeﬃcients for χ = 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 are  ¯λmax(χ)≈
                  0.75, 0.63, 0.58, 0.51, 0.51, 0.52,  respectively.   The  average  are  taken  over  50  trained
                  models; each begins with a random initialization of RACs with additive biases.  The
                  error bars for λi are not shown for the clarity of presentation.


in  the  large T  limit,  these  choices  should  not  signiﬁcantly  change  the  entanglement
entropy when the bipartition is taken at the bond⌈T/2⌉, which are far away from the
boundary.

3.3.  RACs with a pre-trained embedding layer

To isolate the interaction between RACs and the embedding layer, we pre-train the word
embedding Φ (recall section2.2) independently from RACs.  First, we train Φ on the
IMDb training data with a ﬂatten layer publicly available in Keras, while the output
is still the sigmoid function discussed earlier.  The ﬂatten layer contains no trainable
parameters and as a result the classiﬁcation accuracy is optimized based solely on the
trainable  word  embedding.   After  we  train  the  embedding  layer  for  100  epochs  with
the early stopping criterion explained in section3.1, we arrive at a pre-trained Φ that
is not speciﬁcally optimized for RACs, thereby isolating the expressiveness that could
arise  from  the  interaction  between  RACs  and  the  embedding  layer.   After  we  obtain
this pre-trained embedding layer Φ, Φ is ﬁxed and training optimizes only weights and
biases of RACs.
      Figure5(left)  shows  the  prediction  accuracies  and  the  entanglement  entropy
as  a  function  of  the  bond  dimension χ  for  embedding  dimension dI  =  4.   It  can  be
seen that from bond dimension 1 to approximately 20, the training accuracy increases
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         16

monotonically  from  87.1%  to  91.5%  while  the  test  accuracy  increases  from  84.7%  to
86.3%.   Both  quantities  saturate  at χ ≈  20 ≡ χ∗.   The  entanglement  entropy  also
increases rapidly before the onset of the accuracy saturation, then forχ>χ∗ it saturates
at the (average) maximum value of  ¯Smax≈ 2.53.  The results suggest a critical model
size χ∗  such  that  RACs  expressiveness  is  maximal.   Above  this  critical  size  both  the
prediction accuracies and the entanglement entropy saturate.  For practical purposes,
this critical size χ∗ is valuable for identifying a minimal single-layer RACs model that
can best estimate the statistics of IMDb training data set.
     For the IMDb data set, the minimal model size for single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed
pre-trained embedding withdI = 4 isχ∗≈ 20. We also observe similar behaviors on the
saturation of prediction accuracies that correspond to the saturation of entanglement
entropy for larger pre-trained embeddings withdI = 8, 16, 32 with the average maximum
entanglement  entropy  of  ¯Smax ≈  3.87, 4.86, 5.09,  respectively.   For  larger  embedding
dimensions,  not only the maximum entanglement entropy increases,  the critical bond
dimensions and the saturated prediction accuracies also increase (not shown here due
to redundancy of the plots.)  These results are not speciﬁc to the IMDb data set,  as
we observe similar trends in single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed pre-trained embedding in a
smaller RT movie review data set as well.  The results for the RT data set is provided
in the Appendix‖.
     To understand how the entanglement entropy becomes saturated above a critical
bond dimensionχ∗, we investigate the behaviors of the average Schmidt coeﬃcients for
the model size from χ = 5 to χ = 40.  Interestingly, ﬁgure5(right) reveals that above
the  critical  model  size,  the  larger  values  of  the  entanglement  spectrum  (the  function
deﬁned by the Schmidt coeﬃcients indexed in a descending order) all collapse onto a
limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗i , which exhibits the slowest possible exponential decay
rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients.Thus this limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗i  deﬁnes the
average  maximum  entanglement  entropy  achievable  by  our  MPS  ansatz  for  this  data
set, whose value is given by

                               χ∗∑
                  ¯Smax =−          ¯λ∗2i log2  ¯λ∗2i.                                                                    (22)

                               i=1
This  unique  explainability  of  RACs  allows  us  to  infer  a  minimal  recurrent  neural
networks-based model with the minimal number of hidden neurons d∗H + 1 = χ∗  for a
given task, which is not possible with standard RNNs.  From statistical learning theory
point of view, the limiting function  ¯λ∗i determines the bias (in the bias-variance tradeoﬀ
sense) of single-layer RACs, which constrains the information propagation capacity as
measured by the average maximum entanglement entropy (22).  It is interesting to note
that the maximum entanglement entropy is below the upper bound from the area law
of log2(χ), as  ¯Smax≈ 1.17< 4.32≈ log2(χ = 20). Hence, a realistic sequence modeling
task such as sentiment analysis can still achieve high prediction accuracies using easily

‖  For the embedding dimension 4, the critical bond dimension for RT movie data set isχ∗≈ 40, beyond
which the entanglement entropy very slowly increases and plateaus out at the maximum value of 1.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         17


















                  Figure 5.  The behaviors of RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis of the
                  IMDb  data  set,  when  the  word  embedding  of  dimension dI  =  4  is  trained  together
                  with RACs.  (Left) the prediction accuracies slowly increase when the entanglement
                  entropy  (EE)  drops  down  from  the  maximum  value  ¯Smax ≈  1.17  at χ≈  5  to  the
                  saturated  value  0.8 ¯Smax  at χ≈  20,  after  which  the  accuracies  also  saturate.   The
                  saturated EE here is much smaller than that of the ﬁxed embedding case, suggesting
                  that the expressivity is harnessed from a more meaningful representation Φ.  (Right)
                  The  cosine  similarity  between  the  two  word  embedding  computed  from  (7)  reveals
                  that indeed the expressivity is boosted via meaningful word embeddings, which arise
                  in larger single-layer RACs.


trainable RACs, even when the maximum information propagation is bounded above.
In fact, the embedding layer Φ plays a crucial role in attaining high expressive power,
as we show next.

3.4.  The interplay between RACs and the word embedding

To analyze the interplay between the recurrent units in RACs and the embedding layer
Φ,  we  now  train  both  components  simultaneously.   The  prediction  accuracy  and  the
entanglement entropy as a function of the bond dimension is depicted in ﬁgure5(left).
It can be seen that the training and the test accuracy rapidly increases to 98.3% and
90%, respectively, atχ = 5.  The training accuracy then saturates and ﬂuctuates mildly
around 98.5% for χ > 5, while the test accuracy slowly increases for χ∈ [5, 20], after
which it saturates at around 90.5% accuracy.  Despite being simple, our model is ranked
21 (out of 35) in top-performing models (measured by test accuracy) for IMDb sentiment
analysis  [40].   The  best  performing  model  [41]  achieving  the  test  accuracy  of  97    .2%
also uses simple neural network architecture but with the improved quality of the word
embeddings.  Interestingly, unlike in the ﬁxed word embedding case where the maximum
of  entanglement  entropy  (EE)  is  attained  at  its  saturation,  here  the  EE  attains  its
maximum at χ≈ 5 at the value of  ¯Smax≈ 1.17 before dropping down and saturating
at 0.8 ¯Smax when χ≈ 20, after which it ﬂuctuates mildly around the saturated value.
      Although  the  EE  drops  after  its  peak  value,  the  prediction  accuracies  counter-
intuitively increase.  Also, compared to the ﬁxed embedding case,  ¯Smax here is smaller
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         18

and  the  prediction  accuracies,  especially  the  training  accuracy,  are  higher.    These
behaviors also arise in larger word embedding size ofdI = 8, 16, 32, though the maximum
entanglement entropy at the peak are larger and occurs at a larger bond dimension for a
larger model (The plots are not shown here due to redundancy).  The larger model also
attains higher saturated prediction accuracies.  These results suggest that information
propagation or long-range temporal correlation in sequence modeling is not the main
source of expressiveness in estimating the distribution P (σ|w1:T ) in sentiment analysis
tasks.  In fact, the drop in the EE as the accuracies increase suggests that single-layer
RACs must have gained the expressivity through the word embedding Φ.
     To test the hypothesis, we plot the cosine similarity (7) between embedding vectors
of two opposite words that most frequently appear and tends to have a strong inﬂuence
on the review sentiment, i.e.  ‘boring’ and ‘interesting’, ‘worst’ and ‘best’, depicted in
ﬁgure5(right).  We see that the cosine similarity drops monotonically with the bond
dimension and saturates at χ≈ 5.  This might suggest that for χ < 5, the prediction
accuracy  stems  mostly  from  the  temporal  correlation  in  RACs,  while  at χ≥  5,  the
word embedding layer better learns word semantics and start to contribute to higher
prediction accuracy.

4.  Discussion and outlook

We have recasted single-layer recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs) with additive biases
as the dual matrix product states for the entanglement entropy analysis of a real-world
sequence  modeling  task,  the  sentiment  analysis  of  large  realistic  movie  review  data
sets.  The results elucidate that,  although the entanglement entropy of the models is
bounded  above,  single-layer  RACs  can  harness  their  expressive  power  from  trainable
word  embedding  Φ,  achieving  considerably  high  prediction  accuracies.    Even  for  a
ﬁxed word embedding, single-layer RACs can already achieve high prediction accuracies
that  saturate  when  the  entanglement  entropy  saturates  at  its  maximum  value  ¯Smax.
This  ¯Smax  allows one to identify the minimal bond dimension χ∗  that RACs can best
approximate the sentiment distribution of data sequence P (σ|w1:T ).  This  ¯Smax  is also
below the upper bound of the area law for entanglement entropy of a matrix product
state.   Therefore,  for  sentiment  analysis  tasks,  a  low  entanglement  entropy  is  not  a
warrant  to  disregard  simple  yet  easily  trainable  models  such  as  single-layer  RACs.
Importantly,  the  crucial  interplay  between  information  propagation  in  the  recurrent
networks (as reﬂected by the entanglement entropy) and the meaningful word embedding
Φ enables single-layer RACs to very well estimate the sentiment distribution of word
sequenceP (σ|w1:T ).  Our analysis also quantitatively reveals the nature of movie review
sentiment analysis that NLP practitioners are intuitively aware of; reading only a few
statements that contain meaningful keywords might be an eﬃcient strategy to correctly
classify the sentiment of a long review.
     Despite the simplicity of our single-layer architecture with low-dimensional word
embeddings, we still achieve the test accuracy of 90.5% for the sentiment analysis of the
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         19

IMDb data set,  placing our minimal model in the list of top-performing models [40].
Some  top-performing  models  utilize  powerful  modern  neural  network  architectures
such  as  graph  neural  networks  [42]  or  transformers  [43, 44].   All  of  which  still  lack
explainability.    It  is  interesting  to  note  that  some  simple  models,  such  as  classic
LSTM architectures (with high quality word embeddings) [45,46], are also in the top-
performing list.  Remarkably, the best performing model utilizes a very simple neural
architecture with the emphasis on constructing highest quality word embeddings [41].
This  observation  agrees  with  our  quantitative  evidence  that  long-range  information
propagation is not the main source for RNNs’ successes in sentiment analysis, but high
model expressiveness can be attained from the subtle interplay between the information
propagation and the quality of word vector embeddings.
     It  would  be  interesting  to  generalize  the  current  analysis  to  deep  (multi-layer)
RACs models [36] to see the interplay between long-range information propagation in
the recurrent networks and the meaningful word embedding in other realistic natural
language processing tasks, such as sequence to sequence modeling.  Perhaps one could
also ﬁnd a minimal deep RACs model that reproduces the power-law decay in the mutual
information  between  characters,  which  is  a  feature  of  classical  English  texts  [47, 48].
Recently, variants of standard many-body quantum states have been analyzed as highly
expressive variational ansatz to estimate probability distribution [13,19,49]; it’d also be
interesting to implement such models for realistic natural language processing tasks and
investigate how word embedding could help boost models prediction accuracy.  Lastly,
regarding  the  limiting  entanglement  spectrum  that  sets  the  maximum  entanglement
entropy of single-layer RACs, theoretical understanding of such entanglement spectrum
may hint at the minimum bias (in the bias-variance tradeoﬀ sense) attainable by RACs
to  estimate  a  data  distribution,  which  could  provide  a  guideline  to  systematically
study the expressive power of recurrent neural networks from statistical learning theory
viewpoints.

Acknowledgments

This  research  has  received  funding  support  from  the  National  Science,  Research  and
Innovation  Fund  (NSRF)  via  the  Program  Management  Unit  for  Human  Resources
&  Institutional  Development,  Research  and  Innovation  [grant  number  B05F640051],
and  from  Thailand  Science  Research  and  Innovation  Fund  Chulalongkorn  University
[CU   FRB65     ind  (5)  110  23  40].   J.Tangpanitanon,  and  P.  Bhadola  are  supported  by
Blueqat  Inc.    We  acknowledge  the  National  Science  and  Technology  Development
Agency,  National  e-Science  Infrastructure  Consortium,  Chulalongkorn  University  and
the Chulalongkorn Academic Advancement into Its 2nd Century Project (Thailand) for
providing computing infrastructure that has contributed to the research results reported
within this paper (URL:www.e-science.in.th.)  We also thank V. Ngampruetikorn for a
useful discussion, A. T. Rutherford and C. Polpanumas for providing helpful feedbacks
on the manuscript, and K. Phornsiricharoenphant for providing technical supports on
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         20

computational hardware used in this work.

References

 [1]Verstraete F and Cirac J I 2006      Phys.  Rev.  B  73(9) 094423 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
        10.1103/PhysRevB.73.094423
 [2]Verstraete F and Cirac I 2004 Renormalization algorithms for quantum-many body systems in two
        and higher dimensions
 [3]Vidal  G  2007       Phys.   Rev.   Lett.  99(22)  220405  URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
        PhysRevLett.99.220405
 [4]Orus R 2019     Nature Reviews Physics 1 538–550 (Preprint  1812.04011)
 [5]Goodfellow I J, Bengio Y and Courville A 2016     Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press)
        http://www.deeplearningbook.org
 [6]Melko  R  G,  Carleo  G,  Carrasquilla  J  and  Cirac  J  I  2019      Nature  Physics  15  887–892  URL
        https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-019-0545-1
 [7]Torlai G and Melko R G 2020     Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11 325–344 (Preprint
        https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031119-050651)  URL  https://doi.org/
        10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031119-050651
 [8]Carleo G and Troyer M 2017     Science 355 602–606
 [9]Carrasquilla J and Melko R G 2017     Nature Physics 13 431–434 URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
        nphys4035
[10]Stoudenmire  E  and  Schwab  D  J  2016  Supervised  learning  with  tensor  networks        Advances  in
        Neural  Information  Processing  Systems  vol  29  ed  Lee  D,  Sugiyama  M,  Luxburg  U,  Guyon
        I  and  Garnett  R  (Curran  Associates,  Inc.)  URL  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
        2016/file/5314b9674c86e3f9d1ba25ef9bb32895-Paper.pdf
[11]Stoudenmire E 2018       Quantum Science and Technology 3
[12]Liu D, Ran S J, Wittek P, Peng C, Garcia R B, Su G and Lewenstein M 2019        New  Journal  of
        Physics 21 073059 (Preprint  1710.04833)
[13]Glasser I, Pancotti N and Cirac J I 2020       IEEE Access 8 68169–68182
[14]Levine Y, Sharir O, Cohen N and Shashua A 2019       Physical Review Letters 122 ISSN 0031-9007
[15]Levine  Y,  Yakira  D,  Cohen  N  and  Shashua  A  2018  Deep  learning  and  quantum  entanglement:
        Fundamental  connections  with  implications  to  network  design  6th  International  Conference
        on  Learning  Representations,  ICLR  2018,  Vancouver,  BC,  Canada,  April  30  -  May  3,  2018,
        Conference  Track  Proceedings  (OpenReview.net)  URL  https://openreview.net/forum?id=
        SywXXwJAb
[16]Wolf M M, Verstraete F, Hastings M B and Cirac J I 2008        Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(7) 070502 URL
        https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.070502
[17]Bradley T D, Stoudenmire E M and Terilla J 2020        Machine Learning:  Science and Technology 1
        035008
[18]Stokes J and Terilla J 2019       Entropy 21 1236 (Preprint  1902.06888)
[19]Miller  J,  Rabusseau  G  and  Terilla  J  2021  Tensor  networks  for  probabilistic  sequence  modeling
        Proceedings  of  The  24th  International  Conference  on  Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  and  Statistics
        (Proceedings  of  Machine  Learning  Research  vol 130) ed Banerjee A and Fukumizu K (PMLR)
        pp 3079–3087 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/miller21a.html
[20]Guo C, Jie Z, Lu W and Poletti D 2018        Physical Review E 98 042114 ISSN 2470-0045 (Preprint
        1803.10908)
[21]Zhang L, Zhang P, Ma X, Gu S, Su Z and Song D 2019        Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
        Artiﬁcial Intelligence 33 7450–7458 URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/
        view/4735
[22]Jurafsky D and Martin J H 2009       Speech and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (USA: Prentice-
        Hall, Inc.) ISBN 0131873210
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         21

[23]1989       The Oxford English Dictionary  2nd ed (Oxford University Press)
[24]Mikolov  T,  Sutskever  I,  Chen  K,  Corrado  G  S  and  Dean  J  2013  Distributed  representations
        of  words  and  phrases  and  their  compositionality  Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing
        Systems  vol  26  ed  Burges  C  J  C,  Bottou  L,  Welling  M,  Ghahramani  Z  and  Weinberger
        K  Q  (Curran  Associates,  Inc.)  URL  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/file/
        9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf
[25]Pennington J, Socher R and Manning C D 2014 Glove:  Global vectors for word representation
        Proceedings  of  the  2014  Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Processing,
        EMNLP  2014,  October  25-29,  2014,  Doha,  Qatar,  A  meeting  of  SIGDAT,  a  Special  Interest
        Group  of  the  ACL  ed  Moschitti  A,  Pang  B  and  Daelemans  W  (ACL)  pp  1532–1543  URL
        https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/d14-1162
[26]Mehta  P,  Bukov  M,  Wang  C  H,  Day  A  G,  Richardson  C,  Fisher  C  K  and  Schwab  D  J
        2019  Physics  Reports  810  1–124  ISSN  0370-1573  a  high-bias,  low-variance  introduction  to
        Machine  Learning  for  physicists  URL  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
        pii/S0370157319300766
[27]Murphy K P 2013        Machine  learning  :  a  probabilistic  perspective  (Cambridge, Mass. [u.a.]:  MIT
        Press)
[28]Bishop C M 2007       Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics)
        (Springer) ISBN 0387310738
[29]Peters M E, Neumann M, Iyyer M, Gardner M, Clark C, Lee K and Zettlemoyer L 2018 Deep
        contextualized word representations Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
        Chapter  of  the  Association  for  Computational  Linguistics:   Human  Language  Technologies,
        Volume 1 (Long Papers) (New Orleans, Louisiana:  Association for Computational Linguistics)
        pp 2227–2237 URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202
[30]Wu Y, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Bengio Y and Salakhutdinov R R 2016 On multiplicative integration
        with recurrent neural networks Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29  ed Lee
        D D, Sugiyama M, Luxburg U V, Guyon I and Garnett R (Curran Associates, Inc.) pp 2856–2864
[31]Sutskever I, Martens J and Hinton G E 2011 Generating text with recurrent neural networks       ICML
        pp 1017–1024 URL https://icml.cc/2011/papers/524_icmlpaper.pdf
[32]Poon  H  and  Domingos  P  2011  Sum-product  networks:   A  new  deep  architecture        2011  IEEE
        International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops) pp 689–690
[33]Delalleau  O  and  Bengio  Y  2011  Shallow  vs.  deep  sum-product  networks        Advances  in  Neural
        Information Processing Systems  vol 24 ed Shawe-Taylor J, Zemel R, Bartlett P, Pereira F and
        Weinberger  K  Q  (Curran  Associates,  Inc.)  URL  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
        2011/file/8e6b42f1644ecb1327dc03ab345e618b-Paper.pdf
[34]Oseledets  I  V  2011        SIAM  Journal  on  Scientiﬁc  Computing  33  2295–2317  (Preprint  https:
        //doi.org/10.1137/090752286) URL https://doi.org/10.1137/090752286
[35]Ekert A and Knight P L 1995       American Journal of Physics 63 415–423 URL https://doi.org/
        10.1119/1.17904
[36]Levine  Y,  Sharir  O  and  Shashua  A  2018  Beneﬁts  of  depth  for  long-term  memory  of  recurrent
        networks URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJ3d2Ax0-
[37]Eisert J, Cramer M and Plenio M B 2010        Rev.  Mod.  Phys. 82(1) 277–306 URL https://link.
        aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.277
[38]Maas  A  L,  Daly  R  E,  Pham  P  T,  Huang  D,  Ng  A  Y  and  Potts  C  2011  Learning  word
        vectors  for  sentiment  analysis  Proceedings  of  the  49th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association
        for   Computational   Linguistics:    Human   Language   Technologies   (Portland,   Oregon,   USA:
        Association   for   Computational   Linguistics)   pp   142–150   URL   http://www.aclweb.org/
        anthology/P11-1015
[39]Chollet F       et al. 2015 Keras URL https://github.com/fchollet/keras
[40]Papers with code - imdb benchmark (sentiment analysis)        https://paperswithcode.com/sota/
        sentiment-analysis-on-imdb accessed:  2022-03-22
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         22

[41]Thongtan  T  and  Phienthrakul  T  2019  Sentiment  classiﬁcation  using  document  embeddings
        trained  with  cosine  similarity  Proceedings  of  the  57th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association
        for  Computational  Linguistics:   Student  Research  Workshop  (Florence,  Italy:  Association  for
        Computational Linguistics) pp 407–414 URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-2057
[42]Haonan L, Huang S H, Ye T and Xiuyan G 2019 Graph star net for generalized multi-task learning
        URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.12330
[43]Yang Z, Dai Z, Yang Y, Carbonell J, Salakhutdinov R R and Le Q V 2019 Xlnet:  Generalized
        autoregressive   pretraining   for   language   understanding   Advances   in   Neural   Information
        Processing  Systems  vol  32  ed  Wallach  H,  Larochelle  H,  Beygelzimer  A,  d  Alch´e-Buc  F,  Fox
        E and Garnett R (Curran Associates,  Inc.) URL  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
        2019/file/dc6a7e655d7e5840e66733e9ee67cc69-Paper.pdf
[44]Wang  S,  Fang  H,  Khabsa  M,  Mao  H  and  Ma  H  2021  Entailment  as  few-shot  learner  URL
        https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14690
[45]Sachan D S, Zaheer M and Salakhutdinov R 2019 Revisiting lstm networks for semi-supervised text
        classiﬁcation  via  mixed  objective  function  Proceedings  of  the  Thirty-Third  AAAI  Conference
        on  Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  and  Thirty-First  Innovative  Applications  of  Artiﬁcial  Intelligence
        Conference  and  Ninth  AAAI  Symposium  on  Educational  Advances  in  Artiﬁcial  Intelligence
        AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19  (AAAI  Press)  ISBN  978-1-57735-809-1  URL  https://doi.org/
        10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016940
[46]Howard J and Ruder S 2018 Universal language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation       Proceedings
        of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:  Long
        Papers)  (Melbourne,  Australia:  Association  for  Computational  Linguistics)  pp  328–339  URL
        https://aclanthology.org/P18-1031
[47]Lin H and Tegmark M 2017       Entropy 19 299
[48]Lu S, Kanasz-Nagy M, Kukuljan I and Cirac I 2021       arXiv:2103.06872 (quant-ph)
[49]Glasser  I,  Sweke  R,  Pancotti  N,  Eisert  J  and  Cirac  I  2019  Expressive  power  of  tensor-network
        factorizations  for  probabilistic  modeling  Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems
        vol 32 (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
        b86e8d03fe992d1b0e19656875ee557c-Paper.pdf
[50]Pang B and Lee L 2005 Seeing stars:  Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization
        with respect to rating scales Proceedings of the ACL
[51]Papers  with  code  -  mr  benchmark  (sentiment  analysis)        https://paperswithcode.com/sota/
        sentiment-analysis-on-mr accessed:  2022-03-22
[52]Wu F, Souza A, Zhang T, Fifty C, Yu T and Weinberger K 2019 Simplifying graph convolutional
        networks Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of
        Machine Learning Research vol 97) ed Chaudhuri K and Salakhutdinov R (PMLR) pp 6861–6871
        URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/wu19e.html
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         23



















                   Figure A1.  The behaviors of trained RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis
                   of  the  Rotten  Tomatoes  data  set,  when  the  ﬁxed  pre-trained  word  embedding  has
                   dimension dI  = 4.  (Left) the prediction accuracies saturate when the entanglement
                   entropy  (EE)  very  slowly  increases  to  saturation.     The  critical  bond  dimension
                   χ∗≈ 40, after which the EE very slowly increases and eventually saturates, enables
                   one  to  infer  a  minimal  single-layer  RACs  model  for  this  data  set.    The  average
                   maximum  entanglement  entropy  ¯Smax,  which  is  below  the  upper  bound  from  the
                   area  law,  is  attained  when χ  & χ∗.    (Right)  above  the  critical  bond  dimension,
                   the Schmidt coeﬃcients almost collapse onto the limiting entanglement spectrum  ¯λ∗i
                   that  sets  the  slowest  exponential  decay  rate  of  the  Schmidt  coeﬃcients.   Here,  the
                   average maximum Schmidt coeﬃcients for χ = 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 are ¯λmax(χ)≈
                   0.69, 0.48, 0.37, 0.30, 0.28, 0.27, 0.25, respectively. The average are taken over 50 trained
                   models; each begins with a random initialization of RACs with additive biases.  The
                   error bars for λi are not shown for the clarity of presentation.


Appendix A. Sentiment analysis results for the Rotten Tomatoes movie
review data set

To show that our conclusions apply to other data set, here we report similar results for
sentiment analysis of the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) movie review data set. RT movie review
data set is a smaller standard data set for sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation
[50].  The training set and the test set contain   M  = 8,400 and 2,662 diﬀerent samples
respectively.   Both  sets  are  balanced  such  that  each  set  contains  an  equal  number  of
positive  and  negative  reviews.   The  length  of  each  review  is  set  to T  =  20  and  the
dictionary size is N  = 3, 000.  Similar training procedure to those in the main text is
applied.  The batch size, however, is set to 32 for this smaller data set.
      FigureA1(left)  shows  the  prediction  accuracy  and  the  entanglement  entropy  as
a  function  of  the  bond  dimension χ  for  embedding  dimension dI   =  4.    It  can  be
seen that from bond dimension 1 to approximately 40, the training accuracy increases
monotonically from 82.2% to 99.3% while the test accuracy drops from 71.8% to 69.1%.
Both quantities saturate atχ≈ 40≡χ∗.  The increase in the training accuracy and the
decrease in the test accuracy as the number of model parameters increases suggests that
the model is overﬁtting, which can perhaps be alleviated by adding Dropout though it’s
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         24

not  clear  whether  RACs  with  Dropout  can  be  mapped  to  MPS.  On  the  other  hand,
the entanglement entropy increases rapidly before the onset of the prediction accuracy
saturation at χ∗, beyond which it almost plateaus out at large χ.  The results suggest
a critical model size χ∗ such that RACs expressiveness is maximal.  Above this critical
size  the  prediction  accuracies  saturate,  and  the  entanglement  entropy  increases  very
slowly or plateaus out.  Similar to the IMDb data set, this critical sizeχ∗ is valuable for
identifying a minimal model that can achieve highest training accuracies for this class
of model architecture.
     For RT data set,  the minimal model size for single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed pre-
trained embedding with dI  = 4 is χ∗≈ 40. We also observe similar behaviors on the
saturation of prediction accuracies that correspond to the saturation of entanglement
entropy for larger pre-trained embeddings withdI = 8, 16, 32 with the average maximum
entanglement  entropy  of  ¯Smax ≈  3.90, 4.14, 4.38,  respectively.   For  larger  embedding
dimensions,  not only the maximum entanglement entropy increases,  the critical bond
dimensions and the saturated prediction accuracies are also larger (not shown here due
to redundancy of the plots.)
     Fig.A1(right) reveals that above the critical model size     χ∗, the Schmidt coeﬃcients
(indexed in a descending order) are converging towards the limiting  ¯λ∗i , which, similar
to  the  IMDb  data  set  in  the  main  text,  constrains  the  slowest  possible  exponential
decay rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients.  This limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗i  should
constrain the average maximum entanglement entropy according to (22) and also deﬁnes
the  bias  (in  the  bias-variance  tradeoﬀ  sense)  in  the  RACs  architecture  for  sentiment
analysis  modeling.   Similar  to  the  IMDb  data  set,  we  also  note  that  the  maximum
entanglement  entropy  is  below  the  upper  bound  from  the  area  law  of  log2(χ),  as
¯Smax≈ 1.20< 5.32≈ log2(χ = 40).
     To analyze the interplay between RACs and the embedding layer, we now train both
components  simultaneously.   The  prediction  accuracy  and  the  entanglement  entropy
as  a  function  of  the  bond  dimension  is  depicted  in  Fig.A2(left).   It  can  be  seen  that
the training accuracy increases monotonically to saturation with a 99.10% accuracy at
χ≈ 5, while the test accuracy rapidly increases to 67% atχ = 5 then gradually increases
to saturation with a 70% accuracy at χ≈ 20.  On the other hand,  the entanglement
entropy  displays  a  peak  at χ ≈  5  before  dropping  rather  steadily  to  saturation  at
≈ 0.8 ¯Smax at χ≈ 20, after which it ﬂuctuates mildly around the saturated value.  The
test accuracy in our simple setting is comparable to the last entry in the state-of-the-art
list for Rotten Tomatoes sentiment analysis [51], which achieves 76% test accuracy using
graph convolutional neural network architecture [52].
     Similar to IMDb data set in the main text, the EE drops after its peak value, while
the prediction accuracies increase.  These behaviors also arise in larger word embedding
sizes, though the maximum entanglement entropy at the peak are larger (dI = 8, 16, 32,
¯Smax≈ 1.68, 2.08, 2.51,) and occurs at a larger bond dimension for a larger model (plots
are  not  shown  here  due  to  redundancy.)   The  decay  in  the  EE  that  corresponds  to
the increase in the prediction accuracies can be attributed to a more meaningful word
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States                         25


















                    Figure  A2.   The  behaviors  of  RACs  with  additive  biases  for  sentiment  analysis  of
                    the  Rotten  Tomatoes  data  set,  when  the  word  embedding  of  dimension dI  =  4  is
                    trained together with RACs.  (Left) the prediction accuracies slowly increase when the
                    entanglement entropy (EE) drops down from the maximum value  ¯Smax≈ 1.20 atχ≈ 5
                    to the saturated value 0.8 ¯Smax atχ≈ 20, after which the accuracies also saturate.  The
                    saturated EE here is much smaller than that of the ﬁxed embedding case, suggesting
                    that the expressivity is harnessed from a more meaningful representation Φ.  (Right)
                    The  cosine  similarity  between  the  two  word  embedding  computed  from  (7)  reveals
                    that indeed the expressivity is boosted via meaningful word embeddings, which arise
                    in larger single-layer RACs.


embedding Φ, as shown in the cosine similarity plots between embedding vectors of the
two opposite words, depicted in Fig.A2(right).