                    Explicitly antisymmetrized neural network layers
                              for variational Monte Carlo simulation

                               Jeﬀmin  Lin,1  Gil  Goldshlager,1  and  Lin  Lin1, 2,∗
             1Department  of  Mathematics,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  CA  94720,  USA
  2Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                                               (Dated:  December 8, 2021)
       The combination of neural networks and quantum Monte Carlo methods has arisen as a promis-
    ing  path  forward  for  highly  accurate  electronic  structure  calculations.   Previous  proposals  have
    combined equivariant neural network layers with a ﬁnal antisymmetric layer in order to satisfy the
    antisymmetry requirements of the electronic wavefunction.  However, to date it is unclear if one can
    represent antisymmetric functions of physical interest,  and it is diﬃcult to precisely measure the
    expressiveness of the antisymmetric layer.  This work attempts to address this problem by introduc-
    ing explicitly antisymmetrized universal neural network layers.  This approach has a computational
    cost which increases factorially with respect to the system size, but we are nonetheless able to apply
    it to small systems to better understand how the structure of the antisymmetric layer aﬀects its
    performance.  We ﬁrst introduce a generic antisymmetric (GA) neural network layer, which we use
    to  replace  the  entire  antisymmetric  layer  of  the  highly  accurate  ansatz  known  as  the  FermiNet.
    We demonstrate that the resulting FermiNet-GA architecture can yield eﬀectively the exact ground
    state energy for small atoms and molecules.  We then consider a factorized antisymmetric (FA) layer
    which more directly generalizes the FermiNet by replacing the products of determinants with prod-
    ucts of  antisymmetrized  neural networks.  We ﬁnd,  interestingly,  that  the resulting  FermiNet-FA
    architecture does not outperform the FermiNet.  This strongly suggests that the sum of products
    of antisymmetries is a key limiting aspect of the FermiNet architecture.  To explore this further,
    we investigate a slight modiﬁcation of the FermiNet,  called the full determinant mode,  which re-
    places  each  product  of  determinants  with  a  single  combined  determinant.   We  ﬁnd  that  the  full
    single-determinant FermiNet closes a large part of the gap between the standard single-determinant
    FermiNet and FermiNet-GA on small atomic and molecular problems.  Surprisingly, on the nitrogen
    molecule at a dissociating bond length of 4.0 Bohr, the full single-determinant FermiNet can sig-
    niﬁcantly outperform the largest standard FermiNet calculation with 64 determinants, yielding an
    energy within 0.4 kcal/mol of the best available computational benchmark.




                                                I.    INTRODUCTION

  A fundamental challenge in modeling the behavior of electrons in the many-body Schr¨odinger
equation  is  that  the  electronic  wavefunction  must  be  antisymmetric  with  respect  to  particle  ex-
change.  When the number of electrons grows, eﬀective parametrization of the space of such wave-
functions becomes diﬃcult.  Deep learning techniques have recently impacted  ab  initio  quantum
chemistry by providing a new approach to the problem of tractable parameterization of high di-
mensional function spaces in quantum many-body problems.  Over the past few years, a growing
number  of  works  [1–11]  have  demonstrated  the  use  of  neural  networks  in  wavefunction  approxi-
mation,  with  an  increasing  amount  of  importance  placed  on  building  symmetry  constraints  into
models.  In particular, several works [5, 6, 8, 9, 11] have recently applied neural networks to model
antisymmetric wavefunctions.



∗ linlin@math.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                                         2

  The simplest ansatz for representing antisymmetric electronic wavefunctions is known as a Slater
determinant, which is an antisymmetrized product of single particle orbitals.  The optimization of
this ansatz is the core of the Hartree-Fock (HF) method [12].  Conventionally, the representation
power of the Slater determinant has been improved by including multiplicative Jastrow factors and
transforming the particle coordinates via a so-called backﬂow transformation [13, 14], resulting in
the Slater–Jastrow–backﬂow ansatz.  While the Hartree Fock problem can be solved eﬃciently for
a wide range of systems of interest using matrix diagonalization methods, the Slater–Jastrow and
the Slater–Jastrow–backﬂow ansatzes are signiﬁcantly more complicated and can in practice only
be optimized using the quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method known as variational Monte Carlo
(VMC)  [15–18].   According  to  the  variational  principle,  the  energy  obtained  by  any  admissible
wavefunction ansatz is lower bounded by the exact ground state energy.  For strongly correlated
quantum systems, and even weakly correlated quantum systems when high accuracy is required,
a  linear  combination  of  either  a  large  number  of  Slater  determinants  (called  the  conﬁguration
interaction  method  (CI))  or  a  number  of  Slater–Jastrow–backﬂow  ansatzes  is  needed  to  yield  a
suﬃciently low, and therefore accurate, energy estimate.
  Recently,  these  considerations  have  led  to  an  active  interest  in  leveraging  neural  networks  to
improve the construction of the backﬂow [5, 8, 9], the antisymmetry [6, 9], and the Jastrow factor
[8] of these ansatzes.  PauliNet [8] uses relatively small permutation equivariant neural networks for
the backﬂow and invariant neural networks for the Jastrow factor.  The backﬂow transformation
in  PauliNet  is  applied  multiplicatively  to  the  Hartree-Fock  orbitals  before  the  determinant  layer
is applied.  The FermiNet work [9, 19],  revealed around the same time as PauliNet,  uses a more
sophisticated equivariant backﬂow transformation with many more parameters.  Another interesting
and surprising feature of the FermiNet is that it eschews the Jastrow factor entirely.  For a given
system, the FermiNet often achieves lower energies than PauliNet [19].
  While there has been some progress [20–24] in analyzing the expressiveness of the permutation
equivariant mappings used in the backﬂow construction [25], the understanding of the eﬀectiveness
of the antisymmetric neural network layers remains limited [20, 23, 26].  Interestingly, Refs. [5, 9, 23]
propose that a single FermiNet determinant could in theory achieve a universal representation of
antisymmetric functions.  However, these constructions are based on either a sorting process [5, 9] or
an equivariant mapping that essentially encodes the entire wavefunction [23].  Both constructions
yield  discontinuous  feature  mappings  when  the  ambient  space  dimension  is  larger  than  1  or  the
number of particles is greater than 2, as opposed to the continuous neural network layers used in all
works in the literature so far.  Furthermore, in practice, the success of both PauliNet and FermiNet
depends crucially on the quality of the permutation equivariant backﬂow.  Therefore when the VMC
energy is higher than the exact ground state energy,  it is diﬃcult to pin down the source of the
error.
  To address this issue, we consider wavefunction ansatzes which replace parts of the antisymmetric
layer of FermiNet with explicitly antisymmetrized universal neural networks.  The obvious drawback
of this approach is that its computational cost increases factorially with respect to the number of
electrons, and it can therefore only be applied to very small atoms and molecules.  However, the
use of explicit antisymmetrization can still allow us to better understand how the structure of the
antisymmetric layer aﬀects the overall performance.
  We ﬁrst consider a generic antisymmetric (GA) layer, which replaces the entire sum of products
of determinants structure in FermiNet with an explicitly antisymmetrized feed forward neural net-
work.  When combined with the FermiNet backﬂow, the resulting FermiNet-GA architecture can
achieve a universal representation of antisymmetric functions by construction.  We also ﬁnd that
the FermiNet-GA structure is empirically a highly expressive ansatz.  For all systems studied, the
error of the correlation energy is less than 1%,  and is well below chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol
                                                                                                                          3

≈  1.6× 10−3  a.u.).   On  the  other  hand,  at  least  from  a  practical  perspective,  we  ﬁnd  that  the
so-called single-determinant FermiNet, which is in fact computed as a product of two determinants,
is not expressive enough to represent electronic wavefunctions of interest.
  To  investigate  further,  we  replace  the  product  of  determinants  in  the  single-determinant  Fer-
miNet  with  a  product  of  explicitly  antisymmetrized  feed  forward  neural  networks,  yielding  the
factorized  antisymmetric  neural  network  layer  of  rank  1  (FA-1).   We  ﬁnd  that  FA-1  is  not  able
to outperform single-determinant FermiNet, which suggests that the ineﬀectiveness of the single-
determinant FermiNet is closely related to its product structure.  To explore this further, we deﬁne
a factorized antisymmetric neural network layer of rankK (FA-K), which generalizes the structure
of K-determinant  FermiNet.   We  ﬁnd  that  FermiNet-FA-K  does  not  outperform K-determinant
FermiNet,  which  indicates  that  the  sum-of-products  structure  is  a  key  limiting  feature  of  both
architectures.
  These results suggest that removing this sum-of-products structure may be a promising avenue to-
wards developing an eﬃcient antisymmetric layer that is more expressive than the original FermiNet
architecture.  We thus study a variant of the FermiNet called full determinant mode which replaces
the products of determinants used in the FermiNet with single combined determinants.  The full
determinant construction is implemented in the JAX branch of the FermiNet repository [19], and is
also mentioned in passing in the original FermiNet paper [9], but to our knowledge its performance
has not been reported in the literature.  We speciﬁcally investigate the full single-determinant Fer-
miNet, which replaces the product of two determinants used in single-determinant FermiNet with
a single combined determinant.  Our numerical results show that full single-determinant FermiNet
can close a large part of the gap between standard single-determinant FermiNet and the true ground
state energy on small atomic and molecular problems.  We further evaluate the performance of full
single-determinant FermiNet on the nitrogen molecule at a dissociating bond length of 4.0 Bohr,
a challenging strongly correlated system where the standard FermiNet architecture is not able to
yield accurate results even with 64 determinants.  To our great surprise, we ﬁnd that the full single-
determinant FermiNet can outperform the standard 64-determinant FermiNet on this system, and
the error of the energy can be as small as 0.4 kcal/mol compared to the best available computational
benchmark.


                                              II.    PRELIMINARIES

                                       A.    Many-body electron problem

  We consider isolated quantum chemical systems in R3 and use atomic units (a.u.)  throughout the
paper.  Let{ri}Ni=1 represent electron positions,{R(a)I }Mi=1 nuclei positions, and ZI  theIth nuclear
charge.  Under the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the many body Hamiltonian with M  nuclei
and N  electrons is
                                              H =  ˆT + ˆVei + ˆVee +EII,                                                     (1)
where the Hamiltonian is partitioned into the kinetic, electron-ion potential, electron-electron, and
ion-ion interaction, respectively:

         N∑                          N∑  M∑       ZI                    N∑      1                  M∑        ZIZJ
  ˆT  =     −12∆ri,     ˆVei =−              ⏐⏐⏐ri− R(a)⏐⏐⏐,     ˆVee =     |ri− rj|,  EII =            ⏐⏐⏐R(a)         ⏐⏐⏐.

        i=1                         i=1 I=1           I                i<j                        I<J      I − R(a)J
                                                                                                                        (2)
                                                                                                                          4

For a given atomic conﬁguration{R(a)I }, the ion-ion interaction simply adds a constant shift to the
Hamiltonian.
  Let X = (x1,..., xN) be the collection of spatial and spin indices of N  electrons,  where xi  =
(ri,σi), and assume theN electrons can be partitioned intoN↑ spin-up electrons andN↓ spin-down
electrons.   We  denote  by R  =  (r1,..., rN)  the  collection  of  spatial  coordinates  of  the  electrons.
We also denote by R(a)  = (R(a)1 ,..., R(a)M ) the collection of atomic positions.  Then the electron
many-body wavefunction Ψ(X)≡ Ψ(x1,..., xN) is required to be antisymmetric with respect to
the natural action of the symmetric groupSN on the electron conﬁguration X (i.e., the permutation
of the particle indices):
                                Ψ(π(X))≡ Ψ(xπ(1),..., xπ(N)) = (−1)πΨ(X),                                     (3)
where (−1)π is the sign or parity of the permutation π∈SN.
  Note  that  the  Hamiltonian  in  Eq.  (1)  does  not  explicitly  depend  on  the  spin.   As  a  result,
the antisymmetry constraint over the spatial-spin electron conﬁguration can be rewritten using a
spin-independent  wavefunction  Ψ(R)  (abusing  notation  to  reuse  Ψ),  which  reduces  the  number
of  degrees  of  freedom  in  the  wavefunction  and  improves  the  eﬃciency  in  quantum  Monte  Carlo
calculations [15].
  To  see  this,  let  ˆO  be  any  totally  symmetric  spin-independent  operator  (e.g.   electron  density,
energy), and assume we are interested in expectation values of  ˆO with respect to the many body
wavefunction Ψ(X):
                                                ∑    ∫ Ψ∗(X) ˆO(R)Ψ(X) dR
                                        ⟨ ˆO⟩ =    σ∑    ∫ Ψ∗(X)Ψ(X) dR  .                                             (4)

                                                       σ
  For each spin-conﬁgurationσ = (σ1,...,σN), we can always permute the particle index 1,...,N
so that the spin-up indices appear in front of the spin-down indices.  The integrals in the numerator
and denominator of Eq. (4) are independent of such a permutation operation.  Therefore we may
deﬁne the spatial wavefunction
                        Ψ(R) = Ψ((r1,↑),..., (rN↑,↑), (rN↑+1,↓),..., (rN↑+N↓,↓)).                           (5)
By renaming the integration variables,
                                                ∑    ∫ Ψ∗(R) ˆO(R)Ψ(R) dR
                                        ⟨ ˆO⟩ =    σ∑    ∫ Ψ∗(R)Ψ(R) dR
                                                ∫ Ψ∗(R) ˆO(R)Ψ(R) dRσ
                                              =     ∫ Ψ∗(R)Ψ(R) dR  .

We further introduce the notation R↑≡ (r↑1,..., r↑N↑)≡ (r1,..., rN↑) and R↓≡ (r↓1,..., r↓N↓)≡
(rN↑+1,..., rN↑+N↓).  Then the constraint that Ψ(X) is antisymmetric with respect to the action
of SN  is equivalent to the requirement that
                                                 Ψ(R) := Ψ(R↑, R↓)                                                         (6)
is an antisymmetric function with respect to R↑  and R↓  separately, but not necessarily antisym-
metric across the spin-up and spin-down indices.  We can thus work with Ψ(R) instead of Ψ(X)
as long as we enforce this symmetry.  If needed, the original antisymmetric function Ψ(X) can be
recovered by antisymmetrizing the following spin-dependent function:
                                      Ψ(R)δσ1,↑...δσN↑,↑δσN↑+1,↓···δσN,↓.                                            (7)
                                                                                                                         5

                                          B.    Variational Monte Carlo

  In the variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method, the goal is to ﬁnd the variational minimizer Ψ
of the energy functional
                                                     ∫ Ψ∗(R)HΨ(R)dR
                                           E[Ψ] =     ∫ Ψ∗(R)Ψ(R)dR .                                                  (8)

  Given a wavefunction Ψ, which may not be normalized, we can estimate the high-dimensional
integral in Eq. (8) via Markov-Chain Monte Carlo sampling.  We ﬁrst deﬁne the probability distribu-
tion associated with Ψ(R) asp(R) =|Ψ(R)|2/∫|Ψ(R)|2 dR.  We then write the energy functional
as a simple expectation over p(R):
                  ∫ Ψ∗(R)HΨ(R)dR              ∫      HΨ(R)                    ∫
                   ∫ Ψ∗(R)Ψ(R)dR   =                   Ψ(R) p(R)dR =
                                                RNd                             RNdEL(R)p(R)dR,                  (9)
where we have deﬁned the so-called local  energy  associated with Ψ as

                                                 EL(R) = HΨ(R)Ψ(R) .                                                        (10)

  The general strategy for solving the molecular many-body problem (1) is then to parametrize
a family of real wavefunctions Ψθ∈ L2  on some parameter domain (usually Rm, where m is the
number  of  parameters)  and  combine  the  parameterization  with  Monte  Carlo  estimation  to  solve
the resulting approximate eigenproblem.  This is done by drawing a set of samples ξθ  from pθ(R)
using Markov-Chain Monte Carlo and estimating the loss as
                                  L(θ) =E[Ψθ]≈   1           ∑    EL(R;θ) = ~L(θ).                                     (11)
                                                       |ξθ| R∈ξθ

In statistical machine learning parlance, ~L is known as the empirical risk, andL is known as the
true or population risk.


                                            III.    ARCHITECTURES

  In  this  section,  we  describe  the  architectures  for  the  neural  network-based  ansatzes  that  we
explore. We ﬁrst describe the FermiNet architecture, which consists of a (generalized) backﬂow layer
that  produces  permutation  equivariant  features,  followed  by  an  antisymmetric  layer  to  compute
the  wavefunction  amplitude.   We  then  describe  the  other  architectures  that  we  explore,  which
use  diﬀerent  antisymmetric  layers  but  all  share  the  same  generalized  backﬂow  layer  used  in  the
FermiNet.
  The overall structure of the FermiNet may be described as a composition of a general SN↑×SN↓
equivariant feature map (see the deﬁnition below) Y(R)≡ (Y↑(R), Y↓(R)), with an antisymmetric
layer constructed as a sum of products of determinants of orbital matrices Φkσ:

                                            K∑
                                 Ψ(R) =         det Φk↑(Y↑(R)) det Φk↓(Y↓(R)).                                    (12)
                                           k=1
We describe the equivariant feature map and the orbital-determinant layer separately below.
                                                                                                                             6

                            A.    Permutation equivariant features in FermiNet

  The FermiNet feature map Y is a map from particle positions R∈ RN×d to generalized coordi-
nates Y∈ RN×d′.  While d = 3 is the dimension of the physical space, d′ is the number of features
and  can  be  chosen  arbitrarily.   One  particularly  important  symmetry  of  interest  is  given  by  the
tensor product of the canonical permutation representations of SN↑ andSN↓, deﬁned by the action

     (π⊗ρ)(R) = (π⊗ρ)(R↑, R↓) = (π(R↑),ρ(R↓)) = (r↑π(1),..., r↑π(N↑), r↓ρ(1),..., r↓ρ(N↓)).       (13)

The FermiNet map Y is equivariant  with respect to this action, i.e.

                                         Y((π⊗ρ)(R)) = (π⊗ρ)(Y(R)).                                             (14)

  To  ensure  that  Y  is  equivariant  with  respect  to  elements  of SN↑×SN↓  while  incorporating
information about the two-electron distances, the basic layer involves two streams:  a “one-electron
stream” that starts with the electron positions R = (r1,... rN), and a “two-electron stream” that
starts with the electron-electron displacements rij≡ ri− rj.  The streams are averaged over the
electrons,  concatenated  onto  the  one-electron  stream,  and  a  dense  layer  followed  by  a  nonlinear
activation function such as tanh is applied.  Residual connections [27] are also used between layers
of the same shape for both streams.
  More precisely, if hlαi   and hlαβij    are the outputs of the one- and two- electron streams at layer l
with spins α,β∈{↑,↓}, then the concatenated vector for index i and spin α is
                                                                                                   
                                            N↑∑            N↓∑            N↑∑              N↓∑
                       flαi   =hlαi ,  1N↑     hl↑j ,  1N↓    hl↓j ,  1N↑    hlα↑ij ,  1N↓    hlα↓ij                      (15)

                                            j=1            j=1            j=1             j=1

and the output of layer l + 1 is given by the two streams

                                       h(l+1)αi         = tanh(Vlflαi   + bl) + hlαi ,(
                                     h(l+1)αβij         = tanhWlhlαβij   + bl) + hlαβij .                                        (16)

As an initial pre-processing step, the electron positions R are converted to “atomic coordinates” as
                                  (              ⏐⏐⏐rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐,..., rαi − R(a)    ⏐⏐⏐rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐)
                         h0αi   =  rαi − R(a)1 ,           1                    M ,            M     ,                       (17)
                                  (           ⏐⏐⏐rαi − rβ⏐⏐⏐)
                        h0αβij    =rαi − rβj,           j   ,                                                                         (18)

which are invariant with respect to a simultaneous translation of the entire system.  The explicit
dependence on the absolute values enables the network to eﬃciently represent the derivative dis-
continuity due to the electron-nuclei cusp and electron-electron cusp, respectively [9, 28].
  Each map (hl↑, hl↓)↦→ (h(l+1)↑, h(l+1)↓) is SN↑×SN↓  equivariant due to the averaging proce-
dure [25] in Eq. (15), and the map R↦→ h0 is parallel in the particle index i and thus equivariant
as  well.   Therefore  the  map R↦→ Y≡  (Y↑, Y↓)≡  (hL↑, hL↓),  where L  is  the  total  number  of
one-electron layers, is alsoSN↑×SN↓ equivariant.  This is called a backﬂow map, which generalizes
the original proposal of “backﬂow” by Feynman and Cohen [13].
  Note that both Y↑ and Y↓ depend on the positions of all electrons.  The index α in the notation
Yα  does not denote a dependence of Y  only on the corresponding α-spin inputs Rα, but rather
                                                                                                                              7

denotes the symmetry constraint of Yα as equivariant with respect to the action ofSNα on Rα and
invariant with respect to the action of SNβ  on Rβ.  Hence in this paper, we shall refer to the index
{↑,↓} in the expression (Y↑, Y↓) as the pseudospin index.  It has been shown constructively, though
without explicit error bounds, that a simpliﬁed version of this construction [23] can approximate
all and only the equivariant continuous functions.


                                     B.    Antisymmetric layer in FermiNet

  Once the equivariant feature maps Y = (Y↑, Y↓) are generated, they are then used to generate
K pairs of orbital matrices (Φk↑(Y↑), Φk↓(Y↓)).  These orbital matrices are constructed using a set
of per-pseudospin single particle orbitals ϕkσi    (σ∈{↑,↓}), which are deﬁned by applying a simple
dense layer to the equivariant features and multiplying by an exponential envelope function:
                                                                          (    ⏐⏐⏐Σkσi,I(rj− R(a)   ⏐⏐⏐)
                       ϕkσi   (yσj ) = (wkσi · yσj  + bkσi   )∑dkσi,I exp   −                  I   )   .                      (19)
                                                             I
Here wkσi ∈ Rm and bkσi ∈ R are the weights and biases of the dense layer, where m is the number
of  dimensions  in  the  equivariant  features  yσi ,  which  is  chosen  to  be  constant  for  all i,σ.   The
exponential  envelopes  are  parameterized  by dkσi,I ∈ R  and  a  matrix Σkσi,I ∈ Rd×d,  which  can  also
be set to a scaled identity matrix to simplify the ansatz.  The parameters w, b, Σ, d are trainable
and dependent on the pseudospin index σ.  The exponential term ensures that the wavefunction is
normalizable and that the support of each orbital does not extend too far away into the vacuum.
While the orbital functionsϕkσi    are applied only to single feature vectors yj, the ansatz can express
complex  correlations  because  the  feature  vectors  themselves  depend  on  all  of  the  particles  in  a
complex way.
  The orbital matrices follow naturally from these single particle orbitals as
                                                    ϕkσ1  (yσ1 ) ··· ϕkσ1  (yσNσ)
                                     Φkσ(Yσ) =            ...         ...          ....                                       (20)

                                                       ϕkσNσ(yσ1 ) ··· ϕkσNσ(yσNσ)
Once these orbital matrices are constructed, FermiNet creates an antisymmetric wavefunction using
a sum of products of determinants:


                                              Ψ(R) =∑         det Φk↑ det Φk↓                                                  (21)
                                                          k
These determinants are similar to Slater determinants except that their orbitals are general equiv-
ariant functions of all of the input particles rather than simple single particle orbitals.  Such de-
terminants are thus referred to as generalized Slater determinants.  In fact, the original FermiNet
architecture [9] used a weighted sum of products of generalized Slater determinants by adding in a
set of trainable parameters wk and letting

                                           Ψ(R) =∑         wk det Φk↑ det Φk↓.                                               (22)
                                                        k
However, these trainable weights were removed by the original authors in their follow-up work [19],
as they do not add extra expressiveness on top of the ability to tune the scale of the orbital matrices
themselves.  We follow the simpliﬁed construction.
                                                                                                                                              8






















                              Figure 1:  The architecture for the generic antisymmetric layer.  Left:  calculation of the
                       wavefunction contribution from a single pair of permutations π andρ, denoted by Fπ,ρ(Y).  Right:
                            combination of contributions for all permutations π and ρ.  This is implemented as a batch
                              calculation over all pairs of permutations, but we show separate arrows for each pair of
                                         permutations to emphasize the factorial complexity of the operation.


                                                    C.    Generic antisymmetric neural network layer

                          In order to assess the eﬀectiveness of the antisymmetric layer of the FermiNet, we can replace
                       the product of pseudospin determinant terms with a truly universal antisymmetric neural network
                       layer.  Let us ﬁrst deﬁne the antisymmetrization operator on spin σ as

                                                             Aσ[f](R)≡ ∑             (−1)πσf(πσ(R)),                                          (23)
                                                                            πσ∈SNσ
                       where SNσ  is the symmetric group on{1,...,Nσ}.  Following the Leibniz formula for the deter-
                       minant, the antisymmetric structure for the standard single-determinant FermiNet can be written
                       as
                                             Ψ(R) = det Φ↑(Y↑(R))· det Φ↓(Y↓(R))                                     

                                                     = ∏          ∑       (−1)πσϕσ1 (yσπσ(1))···ϕσNσ(yσπσ(Nσ)),                          (24)

                                                        σ∈{↑,↓}    πσ∈SNσ
                                                     ≡ ∏         Aσ[ΞσFermiNet](Yσ),
                                                        σ∈{↑,↓}
y↑1          y↑π(1)
                       where we have deﬁned the orbital product function ΞσFermiNet(Yσ) =∏Nσi=1ϕσi (yσi,θσi ).
y↑2          y↑π(2)       However, we can treat the interaction between pseudospins in a more universal way by consideringFπ1,ρ1(Y)
 ...    π      ...     just a single function f(R↑, R↓) of all electron positions and antisymmetrizing f  with respect to
                                       Fπ,ρ(Y)                                   Fπ1,ρ2(Y)
                                                                                      ...
y↑N↑        y↑π(N↑)           sgn(π)        ×        sgn(ρ)
                                                                      Y          Fπ2,ρ1(Y)          +       Ψ
y↓1          y↓ρ(1)    FFNN                                                      Fπ2,ρ2(Y)
                                 ΞFFNN(π(Y↑),ρ(Y↓))
y↓2     ρ    y↓ρ(2)                                                                   ...
 ...           ...                                                             FπN↑!,ρN↓!(Y)


y↓N↓        y↓ρ(N↓)
                                                                                                                          9

only the subsets of the input indices that correspond to the two spins:
                   A↑A↓[f](R↑, R↓) = ∑                  ∑     (−1)π↑(−1)π↓f(π↑(R↑),π↓(R↓)).                  (25)


                                             π↑∈SN↑   π↓∈SN↓
The standard FermiNet can be written as the doubly antisymmetrized product of orbitals over all
particles
                                  ΨFermiNet(R) =A↑A↓ [ΞFermiNet] (Y↑, Y↓),                                      (26)
where we deﬁne the product over all orbitals
                       ΞFermiNet(Y↑, Y↓) =ϕ↑1(y↑1)···ϕ↑N↑(y↑N↑)ϕ↓1(y↓2)···ϕ↓N↓(y↓N↓).                       (27)

If we replace this all-particle product with a single feed-forward neural network (FFNN) denoted
by ΞFFNN(Y↑, Y↓), we arrive at an architecture that we refer to as the generic antisymmetric layer
(GA):
                                       ΨGA(R) =A↑A↓[ΞFFNN](Y↑, Y↓).                                            (28)
This ansatz can be evaluated explicitly withN↑!N↓! evaluations of ΞFFNN.  Importantly, due to the
equivariance property of Y, we do not need to antisymmetrize the composed function ΞFFNN◦Y, but
only the comparatively small ΞFFNN.  We have found that we can achieve suﬃcient expressiveness
with a very simple choice of ΞFFNN, further reducing the computational cost.  In our experiments,
we use a single hidden layer withNFFNN = 64 nodes and a single application of the tanh activation
function, followed by a linear combination operation.  The cost of a single evaluation of ΞFFNN with
a single hidden layer with NFFNN  nodes is O(d(N↑ +N↓)NFFNN),  resulting in an overall cost of
O(d(N↑ +N↓)N↑!N↓!NFFNN).  We depict the construction of the GA layer in Fig. 1.
  This construction is a universal replacement for the antisymmetry layer in the original FermiNet,
due to the universality of neural networks to approximate functions of various desired smoothness
classes  with  an  appropriate  choice  of  activation  function  [29–32].   In  fact,  the  multiplication  of
two numbers can be approximated to arbitrary accuracy with just four neurons [33], and following
equations (19) and (24), the FermiNet determinant is simply an antisymmetrized product of simple
linear and exponential terms.  In this work we choose ΞFFNN to be a one-hidden-layer feed-forward
neural network for simplicity and eﬃciency, but one can choose any universal function class, e.g.
residual neural networks.


                           D.    Factorized antisymmetric neural network layer

  Instead of replacing the entire antisymmetric layer of the FermiNet, we can consider replacing
each  product  function  ΞσFermiNet  in  Eq.  (24)  with  a  feed-forward  neural  network,  arriving  at  the
ansatz
                                         Ψ(R) = ∏            Aσ[ΞσFFNN](Yσ).                                              (29)
                                                    σ∈{↑,↓}
We  can  relate  this  ansatz  to  the  generic  antisymmetric  layer  by  assuming  that  ΞFFNN  admits  a
functional low rank decomposition

                                                         K∑
                       ΞFFNN(Y↑(R), Y↓(R))≈                 Ξk↑FFNN(Y↑(R))Ξk↓FFNN(Y↓(R)).                       (30)
                                                        k=1
                                                                                                                                             10



































                        Figure 2:  The architecture for the factorized antisymmetric of rank 1 (FA-1).  Top:  calculation of
                             the wavefunction contribution from a single pseudospin σ and permutation π, denoted by
                          Fσπ (Yσ).  Bottom:  combination of contributions for all permutations π for both up and down
                        pseudospin components.  This is implemented as a batch calculation for each pseudospin, but we
                       show separate arrows for each permutation to emphasize the factorial complexity of the operation.
                        For FA-K this entire computation would be copied K times, with a diﬀerent feed-forward-neural
                                             network in each copy, and the results would be added together.



                       This is called the factorized antisymmetric layer of rank-K  (FA-K).  When K = 1, we recover the
                       ansatz in Eq. (29).  We treat this FA-1 layer, also depicted in Fig. 2, as an especially interesting
                       case  given  the  conjecture  of  [23]  that  a  single  generalized  Slater  determinant  may  be  universal.
                       We note that much like in the FermiNet pseudospin determinant terms, the electron positions of
                       diﬀerent spins do interact with each other in each FA pseudospin term due to the construction of
                       the backﬂow (15).
                          We can evaluate the FA-1 layer using Nσ! evaluations of ΞσFFNN  for each pseudospin.  The cost
                       of a single evaluation of ΞσFFNN  is O(dNσNFFNN) operations for the matrix-vector multiplication,
                       and the total cost of the explicit antisymmetrization for FA-1 is O(d(N↑N↑! +N↓N↓!)NFFNN).






yσ1          yσπ(1)

yσ2          yσπ(2)
 ...    π      ...     FFNN      ΞσFFNN(π(Yσ))                ×          Fσπ (Yσ)



yσNσ        yσπ(Nσ)                    sgn(π)



               F↑π1(Y↑)

               F↑π2(Y↑)
 Y↑                ...            +           A↑[Ξ↑FFNN](Y↑)



             F↑πN↑!(Y↑)
                                                                       ×            Ψ
               F↓π1(Y↓)

               F↓π2(Y↓)
 Y↓                ...            +           A↓[Ξ↓FFNN](Y↓)



             F↓πN↓!(Y↓)
                                                                                                                        11

  It  is  worth  noting  that  both  the  factorized  and  the  generic  antisymmetric  ansatzes  have  ad-
dtional  drawbacks  beyond  the  obviously  prohibitive  factorial  scaling.   In  our  experiments  with
these ansatzes, we observed a great deal of numerical instability due to the massive numerical sign
cancellation  of  the  generally  non-zero  terms  in  the  summations  over  the  symmetric  groups.   We
partially ameliorated this issue by performing the wavefunction evaluation in double precision in-
stead of the more standard single precision (or even half precision) for modern deep learning, but
even with this adjustment the numerical stability properties are far too unfavorable to scale these
ansatzes as N↑  and N↓  grow large.  Thus these ansatzes are certainly not intended to be used to
directly  approximate  the  ground  state  wavefunction  of  heavy  atoms  or  large  molecules,  but  are
instead used in this paper as a diagnostic tool for better understanding the empirical performance
of the FermiNet backﬂow and antisymmetry layers.  More details about the practical eﬀects of the
numerical instabilities on our experiments are available in Appendix C.


                                                E.    Jastrow factors

  Although  the  GA  architecture  can  represent  general  antisymmetric  functions  on  compact  do-
mains,  we  have  found  that  without  some  mechanism  of  conﬁning  the  support  size  of  the  wave-
function, the Monte Carlo sampling procedure often becomes unstable.  In the standard FermiNet
orbitals, this decay is handled by the simple exponential envelope terms in Eq. (19).  In our generic
antisymmetric layer, however, we have not directly included exponential decay terms in the anti-
symmetric part, so we require the presence of an additional decay term in the form of a Jastrow
factor.  We found that including an expressive Jastrow factor greatly increased the stability and
accuracy of the ansatz, which suggests that the size of the wavefunction support and the behavior
of the tails are of practical importance to the quality of the approximation.
  In general, we may implement a Jastrow factor by multiplying an antisymmetric wavefunction
ansatz by exp(J(R↑, R↓; R(a))), where the Jastrow factorJ is a function of the electron positions
R and the nuclei locations R(a). J must also be symmetric separately with respect to permutations
of R↑  and R↓  in  order  to  preserve  the  antisymmetry  of  the  overall  wavefunction.   In  order  for
J(R) to capture the decay of the wavefunction, it will need to satisfy J→−∞ as|R|→∞.  The
standard Jastrow form [16] which explicitly handles electron-nuclei, electron-electron, and electron-
electron-nuclei terms is given by

                              Nα∑  M∑     (⏐⏐⏐Rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐)                ∑      Nα∑ Nβ∑                     ⏐⏐⏐)
    J(R; R(a)) = ∑                     χI              I      + ∑                           uαβ(⏐⏐⏐Rαi − Rβj
                     α∈{↑,↓}  i=1 I=1                            α∈{↑,↓}β∈{↑,↓}    i=1 j=1
                                       Nα∑  Nβ∑                                                                       (31)
                                ∑               ∑         (⏐⏐⏐Rαi − Rβ⏐⏐⏐, ⏐⏐⏐Rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐,⏐⏐⏐Rβ         ⏐⏐⏐)
                  + ∑                               fαβI              j               I        j− R(a)I      ,
                     α∈{↑,↓}  β∈{↑,↓}  i=1 j=1   I
where the functions{χI},{uαβ}, and{fαβI } satisfy the desired behavior at inﬁnity.  One possibility
is to use a simple one-body Jastrow from the ﬁrst term above and let χI  represent multiplication
by a ﬁxed constant for each nucleus, so that χI(r) =−aIr, with aI > 0.  Then we have

                                     Nα∑  M∑     (⏐⏐⏐Rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐)              Nα∑  M∑        ⏐⏐⏐Rαi − R(a)⏐⏐⏐,       (32)
          J(R; R(a)) = ∑                      χI              I      = ∑                  −aI              I
                            α∈{↑,↓}  i=1 I=1                            α∈{↑,↓}  i=1  I=1
Similarly, one could use the ﬁrst two terms in Eq. (31) to form a simple two-body Jastrow, with
a similar choice for the electron-electron interaction which is identical for the two spin species, i.e.
                                                                                                                          12

uαβ(r) =−γr, with γ > 0.  These approaches control the support size of the wavefunction, but do
not allow much ﬂexibility in the shape of the wavefunction tails outside of the asymptotic regime,
where the wavefunction decay is known to be a simple isotropic exponential decay.
  To build a more general Jastrow factor, we may leverage the generality of the FermiNet backﬂow
construction to form the backﬂow-based Jastrow
                                                           ∑       Nα∑⏐⏐YαJastrow,i(R)⏐⏐.                                    (33)
                                 J(R; R(a)) =− 1N
                                                         α∈{↑,↓}  i=1

For our numerical results involving the GA and FA-K  architectures, we use this general Jastrow
expression.  The Jastrow factor needs to be able to grow small as the electron positions move far
from the nuclei,  which suggests the use of an unbounded activation function.  To achieve this in
practice, we simply swap out the tanh activation in Eq. (16) for an approximate GeLU activation
[34],
                                                 (            (√      (x + 0.044715x3)))
                           GeLU(x) = 0.5x          1 + tanh         2                                                   (34)
                                                                    π

which, like the hyperbolic tangent function, has the desirable property of being smooth everywhere.


                                         F.    Full determinant FermiNet

  We also explore a variant of the FermiNet called full determinant mode which, like the GA layer,
does not assume a factorized form over the two pseudospins. In the full determinant mode, the single
particle orbitals take exactly the same form as those used in the regular FermiNet architecture.  The
diﬀerence is that instead of using Nσ  orbitals for each spin σ,  we use N  orbitals for both spins,
where N =N↑ +N↓.  The up- and down-pseudospin orbital matrices are then concatenated into a
square N×N  matrix before taking the determinant.  The new formula for the orbital matrices is

                                                    ϕkσ1  (yσ1 ) ··· ϕkσ1  (yσNσ)
                                    Φkσfull(Yσ) =         ...        ...         ...,                                       (35)

                                                       ϕkσN (yσ1 ) ··· ϕkσN (yσNσ)

where  the  only  diﬀerence  from  Eq.  (20)  is  the  change  of  the  maximum  orbital  index  from  the
pseudospin-speciﬁc Nσ  to  the  total  particle  count N.   Therefore  Φkσfull(Yσ)  is  a  matrix  of  size
N×Nσ.  The ﬁnal ansatz is then generated as the sum of the determinants of the concatenated
orbital matrices:

                                                              K∑       [             ]
                                     ΨFermiNet,full(R) =          det   Φk↑full, Φk↓full.                                        (36)
                                                             k=1
  The  idea  behind  this  construction  is  to  provide  a  more  ﬂexible  way  to  treat  the  interactions
between the two pseudospin components.  Importantly, because Y is only equivariant with respect
to  permutations  which  exchange  particles  of  the  same  spin,  the  concatenated  determinant  does
not enforce an antisymmetry constraint between particles of opposite spins.  We also note that it
                                                                                                                       13

is  possible  to  reconstruct  the  original  FermiNet  ansatz  as  a  special  case  of  the  full  determinant
ansatz,  by  setting ϕkσi   (yσj )  =  0  whenever σ  =↑  and i > N↑  or σ  =↓  and i≤ N↑.   In  that
case the full matrix becomes block-diagonal and the determinant factors into a simple product of
pseudospin determinants [9].  We are particularly interested in the evaluating the performance of
this full determinant mode whenK = 1, which we refer to as the full single-determinant FermiNet.



                                             IV.    OPTIMIZATION

                                            A.    Gradient calculation

  When computing parameter updates, estimating the gradient ofL(θ) by directly diﬀerentiating
the empirical risk  ˜L(θ) deﬁned in Eq. (11) using an automatic diﬀerentiation framework is generally
diﬃcult due to the dependence of the Monte Carlo sampling on the parameters θ.  However, the
following standard unbiased estimate of the gradient of the true expected energy E[Ψθ]≡L(θ) is
available for real wavefunctions [35]:
                                         ∫ 2(∂θ log|Ψθ|)(EL(R;θ)−L(θ))|Ψθ|2 dR
                            ∂θL(θ) =                        ∫|Ψθ|2 dR
                                              ∑                                                                      (37)
                                     ≈   1|ξθ|      2(∂θ log|Ψθ|)(EL(R;θ)−  ˜L(θ))
                                             R∈ξθ

where ξθ  are a set of samples from the density pθ(R) =|Ψθ(R)|2/∫|Ψθ|2 dR.  For completeness,
the derivation of the gradient is provided in Appendix E.
  The zero-variance principle [36] states that the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (Eq. (1)) will have
the same local energy everywhere. This improves the quality of the loss and gradient approximations
as the training converges.  In addition, this principle can make the variance of the local energy an
attractive target for minimization.  Indeed, variance minimization has an extensive history in the
quantum Monte Carlo space [37–39].  Nonetheless, we follow the work of FermiNet [9, 19] and only
use energy minimization to optimize our wavefunctions.



                                                   B.    Optimizer

  The choice of eﬃcient optimization algorithms for parameter updates in variational Monte Carlo
has  historically  been  a  complex  issue  and  is  still  under  active  debate  (see  e.g.  [1,  9,  11,  18,  40–
43]).   Among  these  works,  Ref.  [9]  provided  evidence  that  the  use  of  the  Kronecker  Factorized
Approximate  Curvature  (KFAC)  method  [44]  can  be  advantageous  when  compared  to  standard
stochastic gradient descent-like methods used in the machine learning community such as Adam [45].
KFAC is a method for approximating natural gradient descent eﬃciently by preconditioning the
gradient with an approximate inverse of the Fisher information matrix. Both the overall structure of
KFAC and the extra steps required to apply KFAC to an unnormalized wavefunction are described
succinctly in [9].  For the convenience of the reader we reproduce here an overview of these topics.
  In the exact natural gradient descent method, the gradient of the loss function is multiplied by
the inverse of the Fisher information matrix before using the gradient to make a parameter update
[46].  This has the eﬀect of taking the path of steepest descent not in Euclidean parameter space,
                                                                                                                        14

but in the space of probability distributions deﬁned by the model, with distance measured by the
KL-divergence [47].  Concretely, updates in natural gradient descent take the form

                                               θ′ =θ−ηF−1∇θL(θ).                                                      (38)

Here η∈ R is the learning rate andF  is the Fisher information matrix deﬁned as
                                                      [∂ logp(R)     ∂ logp(R)]
                                      Fij = Ep(R)           ∂θi          ∂θj        .                                          (39)

Note  that  in  our  case p(R)∝|Ψθ(R)|2,  though  the  two  are  not  equal  as  Ψ  is  not  necessarily
normalized.  In fact, obtaining the Fisher information matrix requires a slightly diﬀerent calculation
in an unnormalized setting, which is usually referred to as stochastic reconﬁguration [18]:

                              Fij∝ Ep(R)[(Oi− Ep(R) [Oi])(Oj− Ep(R) [Oj])],                               (40)

whereOi  = ∂ log|Ψθ(R)|/∂θi.   The  equivalence  of  this  formulation  is  proved  in  Appendix  C  of
[9].  In the setting of quantum information geometry, the Fisher information matrix is proportional
to, and perhaps more accurately viewed as, the Fubini-Study metric tensor or quantum geometric
tensor [48].
  Directly  inverting  the  Fisher  information  matrix  is  infeasible  for  large  models,  as  the  matrix
dimensions scale directly with number of parameters.  KFAC solves this problem by making two
approximations to the Fisher matrix to allow its eﬃcient inversion.  The ﬁrst is to assume that the
Fisher entries for weights in diﬀerent layers of the network are zero.  This assumption reduces the
Fisher matrix to a block diagonal form, so that inverting the remaining matrix only requires invert-
ing each block independently.  The second is based on the observation that the block corresponding
to each layer of the network can be written as the mean-centered covariance of a Kronecker product
of two vectors, one consisting of neuron activation values for the inputs to the layer and the other
consisting  of  gradients  of  the  loss  with  respect  to  the  outputs  of  the  layer.   KFAC  replaces  this
with the Kronecker product of the mean-centered covariance of the same vectors.  As discussed in
[44], this is a signiﬁcant and theoretically unsupported approximation, but seems to work well in
practice, at least in some use cases.
  In our experiments, we rely on the JAX implementation of KFAC provided by the work of [9].  In
using this implementation, we register all dense layers in our networks with KFAC, including those
within the feed-forward neural networks of our generic antisymmetric and factorized antisymmetric
layers.  This ensures that we use the Kronecker product approximation of the Fisher matrix for all
layers in the network, rather than defaulting to a simpler diagonal approximation.


                                    V.    NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

  In this section, we compare the previously described architectures on small atomic and molec-
ular systems.  All numerical experiments with the factorized and generic antisymmetric layers are
performed using the VMCNet repository [49], which is based on the JAX framework [50].  In Ap-
pendix B, we demonstrate the comparability of the VMCNet repository with the JAX branch of the
FermiNet repository [19].  Using JAX allows us to leverage the implementation of KFAC in [51], take
advantage of the ﬂexibility provided by JAX’s clean functional style,  and enjoy the performance
beneﬁts granted by its excellent out-of-the-box GPU utilization and just-in-time compilation.  We
used A100 GPUs on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) for any calculations that required double
                                                                                                                            15

Table I: Comparison of methods on atomic systems.  FA stands for factorized antisymmetric layer,
 and GA stands for generic antisymmetric layer, as discussed in section III. The 16 determinant
                         FermiNet and Hartree-Fock results are taken from Ref. [9].

              FermiNet                                         FermiNet
                 1 det              FA-1          FermiNet1 full det16 dets [9]           GA            HF [9]    Reference [52]
   B          -24.65236(3)  -24.65251(2)  -24.65300(3)  -24.65370(3)  -24.65380(2)   -24.53316     -24.65391
   corr %    98.71(2)%      98.84(2)%     99.25(2)%     99.83(3)%      99.91(1)%
   C          -37.84247(4)  -37.84252(3)  -37.84384(4)  -37.84471(5)  -37.84473(3)   -37.6938       -37.8450
   corr %    98.33(3)%      98.36(2)%     99.23(3)%     99.81(3)%      99.82(2)%
   N          -54.58662(5)  -54.58664(4)  -54.58800(8)  -54.58882(6)  -54.58868(4)   -54.4047       -54.5892
   corr %    98.60(3)%      98.61(2)%     99.35(5)%     99.79(3)%      99.72(4)%
   O         -75.06314(13)  -75.06305(6)  -75.06510(6)  -75.06655(7)  -75.06506(6)a            -74.8192       -75.0673
   corr %    98.32(5)%      98.29(3)%     99.11(2)%     99.70(3)%      99.10(3)%

a Due to the limitations of our computational resources, this result uses the simple but more restrictive one-body
  Jastrow from Eq. (32), and the parameters may not be fully optimized.


precision, and GTX 2080TI GPUs with the Berkeley Research Computing (BRC) program for all
other calculations.
  To estimate energy values accurately after training, we ran pure MCMC for a large number of
iterations without performing parameter updates, collecting samples every 10 iterations.  We also
estimated the integrated autocorrelation of the local energy during these evaluation runs in order
to get a robust estimate of the standard error of our energy estimates.  The hyperparameters we
used,  including the number of training and evaluation iterations,  are listed in Appendix A. The
gradient clipping and sampling procedures are described in Appendix F.
  Throughout this section, we use the following standard notation to present our numerical results.
All units are atomic units (a.u.)  unless otherwise speciﬁed.  The estimator of the energy used is
the sample mean followed by, in parentheses, the standard error in the last digit(s) of the estimate.
For example, -54.58868(4) means a sample mean of -54.58868 a.u.  with a standard error of approx-
imately 4× 10−5 a.u., and -75.06314(13) means a sample mean of -75.06314 a.u.  with a standard
error of approximately 1.3× 10−4 a.u..  The error of the energy is also measured by the percentage
of the correlation energy recovered.  The correlation energy is deﬁned to be the diﬀerence between
the  Hartree-Fock  energy  and  the  exact  ground  state  energy,  so  that  recovering  0%  of  the  corre-
lation energy means that the calculation produces the Hartree-Fock energy, and recovering 100%
means the calculation is exact.  The correlation energy itself only contributes a tiny amount, usually
less than 1%, to the ground state total energy, but capturing the correlation energy accurately is
extremely important in chemistry.


                                        A.    Performance:  atomic systems

  We test our generic and factorized antisymmetric architectures on a few small atoms with nuclear
charge from ﬁve to eight and compare these results to the results of FermiNet with 1 determinant,
FermiNet with 1 full determinant,  and FermiNet with 16 determinants.  In Table I, we compare
the attained energies on these architectures after training with KFAC. These results are depicted
as well in Figure 3.
                                                                                                                        16


























  Figure 3:  Comparison of methods on atomic systems.  FA stands for factorized antisymmetric
      layer, and GA stands for generic antisymmetric layer, as discussed in section III. The 16
 determinant FermiNet numbers are taken from Ref. [9].  The GA result on the oxygen atom uses
the more restrictive one-body Jastrow, and the parameters may not be fully optimized due to the
      limitations of our resources.  Dashed line indicates 1% of the error in correlation energy.



  We ﬁnd that the generic antisymmetric layer attains highly accurate energies when paired with
the backﬂow-based Jastrow, achieving greater than 99.7% of the correlation energy.  For the smallest
systems, i.e.  boron and carbon, the FermiNet-GA ansatz does at least as well as many-determinant
FermiNet.  For the larger systems, the performance of FermiNet-GA in our implementation began
to  suﬀer  noticeably  as  we  hit  the  limitations  of  our  computational  resources.   For  example,  our
result on oxygen for the generic antisymmetric architecture used only the simple one-body Jastrow
in  Eq.  (32)  and  may  not  have  reached  the  lowest  energy  that  could  be  attained  with  additional
training. We provide further discussion of the challenges with numerical stability and computational
cost in Appendix C.
  Interestingly, we do not see a gap in the attained energy between the factorized antisymmetric
layer of rank 1 and single-determinant FermiNet for any system except for boron.  To explore this
trend further, we compare in Figure 4 the factorized antisymmetric layers of rank 1 through 4 against
the FermiNet with 1 through 4 determinants, all on the nitrogen atom.  We ﬁnd that FA-K performs
approximately equivalently to k-determinant FermiNet in all cases, and in most cases it performs
slightly  worse.   This  comparison  is  telling  since  replacing  each  generalized  Slater  determinant  in
theK-determinant FermiNet with an explicitly antisymmetrized feedforward neural network yields
exactly  the  FA-K  architecture.   The  fact  that  this  does  not  yield  a  performance  improvement
suggests that the reason K-determinant FermiNet is not fully general is not due to the structure
of the individual generalized Slater determinants, but rather due to the sum of products structure
                                                                                                                       17
















Figure 4:  Comparison of factorized antisymmetric layer of rank K with K-determinant FermiNet
     for K = 1, 2, 3, 4 on the nitrogen atom.  Data for FA-K is presented with both the simple
     one-body Jastrow and the more expressive backﬂow based Jastrow, though results for the
    backﬂow Jastrow are limited to K≤ 2 due to numerical stability issues and computational
 resource constraints.  Data for multi-determinant FermiNet represent the best of several runs to
                                         account for run-to-run variance.
















                  (a) Generic antisymmetry                     (b) Factorized antisymmetric layer of rank 1

  Figure 5:  Adam versus KFAC for the optimization of the generic and factorized antisymmetry
 architectures on the carbon atom.  The proposed updates prior to the application of the learning
    rate may have diﬀerent scales for the two optimizers, so we choose the largest stable initial
  learning rate for each from a coarse sweep of learning rates α with log10α∈ [−4,−1].  At each
  epoch, rolling averages of the previous 10% of training epochs are shown here for clarity.  One
                                         epoch is one parameter update.


that is used to combine the generalized Slater determinants together.  This appears to be true even
though the sum of products is only taken with respect to the pseudospin components generated by
the backﬂow rather than the original spins.
  We also provide additional evidence in favor of the claim in [9] that KFAC provides an advantage
over Adam when optimizing FermiNet-like architectures for small atoms and molecules.  In Figure 5
we provide a log-log plot of the correlation energy error during training of the generic and factorized
                                                                                                                                                      18
















                                                (a) Generic antisymmetry                      (b) Factorized antisymmetric layer of rank 1

                                 Figure 6:  KFAC at a few learning rates α for the optimization of the generic and factorized
                              antisymmetry architectures on the carbon atom.  At each epoch, rolling averages of the previous
                              10% of training epochs are shown here for clarity.  One epoch is one parameter update.  There is
                                                occasionally some initial instability within the ﬁrst 10 or so epochs.










                                          Figure 7:  Atomic conﬁguration for the square H4 model.  The side length is a.


                             antisymmetric architectures on the carbon atom.  In this ﬁgure, the learning rate schedule for KFAC
                             was chosen to be 5· 10−2/(1 + 10−4t).  The learning rate schedule diﬀered slightly for Adam, chosen
                             instead to be 10−4/(1+10−4t).  To determine the initial learning rate for both Adam and KFAC, we
                             coarsely swept over a range of initial learning rates between 1e-4 and 1e-1 on the Carbon atom and
                             picked the learning rate which resulted in the lowest ﬁnal energies without encountering numerical
                             instability  or  NaNs.   The  diﬀerence  in  the  learning  rates  which  we  found  were  best  for  the  two
                             optimizers  may  be  due  to  the  diﬀerent  scale  of  the  updates  prior  to  the  learning  rate  scaling.
                             Figure 6 shows that the choice of learning rate is quite important, and we generally found that in
                             our experiments,  using the highest consistently stable initial learning rate resulted in the lowest
                             energies overall.  When the learning rate is chosen in this way, KFAC reaches similar energy levels
                             to Adam with as many as two orders of magnitude fewer epochs.



                                                                   B.    Performance:  square H4 model

                                The square H4 model (Fig. 7) provides an interesting case study as a prototypical strongly corre-
                             lated system [53].  Unlike the atomic case, the simple product of a pseudospin-up and pseudospin-
                             down antisymmetry is inadequate to capture the ground state within a few percent of the correlation








H                   H






H         a         H
                                                                                                                                19



















                         (a) a = 1.0 Bohr                                            (b) a = 4.0 Bohr

Figure 8:  Error of the total energy attained by various VMC ansatzes on the square H4 model of
  diﬀerent bond lengths.  Details on the complete basis set extrapolation for FCI are included in
                                                         Appendix D.




   Table II: Comparison of methods on the square H4 model.  Details on the complete basis set
                       extrapolation for RHF/UHF/FCI are included in Appendix D.


        a (Bohr)          RHF                   UHF                   FA-1                FermiNet1 det                    FCI

           1.0             -1.2863                -1.3358           -1.424518(7)       -1.424531(6)           -1.4390
           4.0             -1.7492                -2.0092           -2.029525(4)       -2.029502(4)           -2.0342
        a (Bohr)       FermiNet              FermiNet             FermiNet
                          2 dets              16 dets             1 full det                 GA                     FCI
           1.0         -1.438804(5)       -1.438796(5)       -1.438805(4)       -1.438799(4)           -1.4390
           4.0         -2.034212(3)       -2.034208(3)       -2.034217(2)       -2.034218(3)           -2.0342





energy.  In Fig. 8, we see that in both FA-1 and the standard single-determinant FermiNet, the en-
ergy attained was signiﬁcantly higher than that of any of the other neural network ansatzes tested
here.  We ﬁnd excellent agreement between multiple-determinant FermiNet, full single-determinant
FermiNet, and FermiNet-GA, agreeing within the estimated Monte-Carlo error.  The failure of FA-1
to capture more of the ground-state energy than the standard single-determinant FermiNet again
suggests  that,  at  least  for  the  small  atomic  and  molecular  systems  modeled  here,  the  FermiNet
architecture is already very expressive for each pseudospin antisymmetry, even without an explicit
Jastrow factor.  The fact that even the addition of the general backﬂow-based Jastrow to the FA-1
architecture does not yield better results than FermiNet suggests that the lack of expressiveness of
these simple “rank-one” product wavefunction ansatzes has to do with their nodal structure.
                                                                                                                       20
































  Figure 9:  Nodal surface cross-sections of various ansatzes on the lithium atom during training.
  The locations of two electrons are ﬁxed, with one spin-up (same spin) electron in blue and one
    spin-down (opposite spin) electron in red.  The ﬁxed electrons are in random locations.  The
  surfaces shown are produced by evaluating the sign of the wavefunction on the position of the
  remaining (spin-up) electron in the box [−5, 5]3 on 150 points in each direction and using the
                      Isosurface graph object of the Plotly python graphing library.



                                      C.    Comparison of nodal surfaces

  Given a suﬃciently general Jastrow correlation factor, the essential diﬃculty in the expressiveness
of trial wavefunctions for quantum Monte Carlo methods lies in the accurate modeling of the nodal
hypersurface [54].  We thus explore the nodal hypersurfaces generated by several of our ansatzes
in Figures 9 and 10, taking inspiration from [54].  In these ﬁgures, we ﬁx the locations of all but
one electron in the lithium and beryllium atoms and plot the nodal surface of the resulting one-
body functions in the ﬁnal electron position for four of our ansatzes:  standard single-determinant
FermiNet,  FA-1,  full single-determinant FermiNet,  and GA. This plotted nodal surface is thus a
3-dimensional cross-section of the full (3N− 1)-dimensional nodal hypersurface of the many-body
wavefunction, where for example for the beryllium atom 3N− 1 = 11.
  The nodal surface of the lithium wavefunction is essentially described by the two-particle anti-
symmetry between the two electrons of the same spin.  In this two-particle regime, Ref. [23] shows
                                                                                                                          21
































Figure 10:  Nodal surface cross-sections of various ansatzes on the beryliium atom during training.
 The locations of three electrons are ﬁxed, with one spin-up (same spin) electron in blue and two
spin-down (opposite spin) electron in red.  The ﬁxed spin-up electron is placed at (2, 1, 0), and the
 two spin-down electrons are placed at (0,±2, 0).  The surfaces shown are produced by evaluating
the sign of the wavefunction on the position of the remaining (spin-up) electron in the box [−5, 5]3
     on 150 points in each direction and using the Isosurface graph object of the Plotly python
                                                    graphing library.


the  universality  of  the  single  generalized  Slater  determinant.   Indeed,  a  generic  antisymmetry  of
two  particles  can  be  exactly  written  as  a  single  two-particle  determinant  with  an  appropriately
general backﬂow,  and so the architectures compared here are functionally equivalent in terms of
their  representation  power.   We  see  good  agreement  between  the  nodal  surface  cross-sections  as
early as epoch 2500 (Figure 9).
  However, in beryllium, we observe qualitative diﬀerences between the nodal surface cross-sections
between  the  diﬀerent  architectures.   If  we  choose  random  locations  for  the  three  ﬁxed  electron
positions, we ﬁnd that the nodal surface cross-sections look much like the smooth spheres in the
lithium ﬁgure for all architectures.  However, in Figure 10 we choose the two opposite-spin electrons
to be placed at (0,±2, 0), and we see that the nodal surface cross-sections for FermiNet and FA-1
(Figure 10) appear to be the union of two smooth surfaces.  We were able to conﬁrm that these two
surfaces originate from the product structure of the pseudospin terms by removing a psuedospin
                                                                                                                       22




























 Figure 11:  Visual comparison of diﬀerent FermiNet architectures on the nitrogen molecule with
     bond length stretched to 4.0 Bohr.  Energies shown are the absolute energy diﬀerence (in
Hartrees) between the attained energy and the r12-MR-ACPF computational reference [56].  The
UCCSD(T) and the Pfau et al.  energies were extracted from Figure 5 in reference [9].  The dashed
                                         line indicates chemical accuracy.


term and replotting the resulting nodal surface.  On the other hand, the nodal surface cross-section
obtained from GA and the full single-determinant FermiNet appear to consist of only one smooth
surface.  This diﬀerence aligns with our assertion that the product structure of FermiNet and FA-1
may limit their ability to represent the true nodal surface of the ground state wavefunction.  A video
is available with rotating views of the ﬁnal cross-sections for all four wavefunction ansatzes [55].
  Our study of the nodal surfaces in this section is importantly limited by the fact that we can only
observe a 3-dimensional cross-section of the full nodal surface, so we are not able to directly draw
conclusions about the global structure of the nodal surface when using only a single cross-section.
Ideally, we could benchmark these plots against the ground truth of the nodal surface generated by
the FCI wavefunction for this system.  We found, however, that even the qualitative shape of the
FCI nodal surface (not depicted here) depends strongly on the choice of the ﬁnite sized basis set,
and is thus diﬃcult to compare systematically to the VMC-derived wavefunctions.


              D.    Nitrogen molecule:  Performance of the full determinant FermiNet

  We ﬁnally provide a comparison of a few diﬀerent FermiNet architectures on the stretched nitro-
gen molecule, which is a challenging strongly correlated system.  Pfau et al.  [9] demonstrate that
                                                                                                                      23

the standard FermiNet architecture is not able to accurately model this system, particularly around
the dissociating bond length of 4.0 Bohr.  We corroborate this ﬁnding on the FermiNet repository
using 1 and 16 determinants,  with results reported in Figure 11.  The energies may be found in
Appendix H. The performance of the standard multiple-determinant FermiNet is improved some-
what over the standard single-determinant FermiNet, but the energy does not approach the best
available computational benchmark obtained by the r12-MR-ACPF method [56].  We are unable
to test the FA and GA architectures on this system within the constraints of our computational
resources.  However,  we ﬁnd that the full single-determinant FermiNet is able to outperform the
standard  64-determinant  FermiNet  and  come  within  chemical  accuracy  of  the  benchmark  value.
We observed a non-trivial amount of run-to-run variance in our results, indicating that initializa-
tion and optimization methods for FermiNet-like architectures may require further investigation.
Nonetheless,  we  were  able  to  replicate  this  result  on  several  distinct  optimization  runs,  and  we
veriﬁed the energies obtained by converting the parameters to the form required by our VMCNet
repository and doing a pure MCMC evaluation with rigorous estimates of the statistical error.  This
astonishing result implies the need for further exploration into the potential universality properties
of the full single-determinant FermiNet for strongly correlated problems in quantum chemistry.



                                               VI.    DISCUSSION

  We show that explicitly antisymmetrized neural networks can be used to advance the understand-
ing of the performance of neural network based VMC ansatzes.  By replacing the antisymmetric
layer in the FermiNet with a generic antisymmetrized neural network with relatively few nodes and
a simple Jastrow factor, we ﬁnd that the resulting FermiNet-GA structure is highly expressive and
can yield accurate ground state energies (error of the correlation energy is less than 1%).  On the
other hand,  if we replace each individual pseudospin determinant of FermiNet with an explicitly
antisymmetrized neural network, the resulting FermiNet-FA-K  structure does not outperform the
K-determinant FermiNet.  These observations suggest that the lack of expressiveness of the stan-
dard single-determinant FermiNet structure may be largely due to the product structure of the two
pseudospin components of its determinant layer.  This motivates us to investigate the “full determi-
nant” mode of the FermiNet, which signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy compared to both standard
single-determinant FermiNet and FermiNet-FA-1.  We observed a signiﬁcant amount of run-to-run
variance between training runs with identical architectures, indicating that further understanding
of initialization and optimization techniques is needed.
  One  of  our  original  motivations  for  developing  FermiNet-GA  was  to  resolve  the  challenges  of
the stretched nitrogen molecule as discussed in Ref. [9].  This is a challenging strongly correlated
chemical  system,  and  the  use  of  a  multiple  FermiNet  determinant  structure  is  still  insuﬃcient
compared to the best computational results available.  We were unable to apply the GA layer to
this  system  yet  due  to  its  prohibitive  computational  cost.   However,  inspired  by  the  success  of
the full determinant on smaller systems, we investigate its performance on the nitrogen molecule
around a challenging bond length of 4.0 Bohr.  We ﬁnd that the full single-determinant FermiNet
achieves an energy within 0.4 kcal/mol of the r12-MR-ACPF method [56], which is currently the
best available computational benchmark.
  As part of our work, we contribute a ﬂexible, modular variational Monte Carlo repository called
VMCNet [49], built on the JAX machine learning framework [50].  VMCNet is inspired by the JAX
branch of the FermiNet repository [19] but uses the Flax API to facilitate developing new compo-
nents and experimenting with diﬀerent components of various architectures.  We keep the model
construction code in a separate submodule from the code for training, sampling, and evaluation,
                                                                                                                        24

and we leverage simple asynchronous logging to enable monitoring of the training process.  This
work focuses on VMC simulation in the ﬁrst quantization, but VMCNet can also be extended to
simulate quantum systems in a second quantized form [57] as well.
  We  hope  this  work  provides  a  ﬁrst  step  towards  understanding  the  expressiveness  of  these
FermiNet-like  architectures.   Our  results  suggest  the  utility  of  diagnostic  tools  such  as  explicitly
antisymmetrized neural networks for building such understanding.  They also suggest the need to
further explore the potential universality properties of the full determinant mode of FermiNet.  By
further improvement upon the architecture and the optimization of the full determinant FermiNet,
in  the  best  case,  it  may  be  possible  to  consistently  achieve  accurate  results  for  a  large  class  of
physical and chemical systems of interest.


                                           ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

  This  work  was  partially  supported  by  the  Air  Force  Oﬃce  of  Scientiﬁc  Research  under  award
number FA9550-18-1-0095 (J.L.), by the NSF under Grant No.  DMS-1652330 (G.G.), and by the
Department of Energy under Grant No.  DE-SC0017867 and the CAMERA program (L.L.).  L.L.
is a Simons Investigator.  We would like to acknowledge the use of computational resources at the
Berkeley Research Computing (BRC) program at the University of California, Berkeley, the Google
Cloud Platform (GCP), and the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC).
We  thank  Giuseppe  Carleo,  Bryan  Clark,  Di  Luo,  James  Stokes,  Jiefu  Zhang,  Xiaojie  Wu,  and
Fabian  Faulstich  for  their  helpful  discussions.   We  also  thank  the  hospitality  of  the  American
Institute  of  Mathematics  (AIM)  for  the  SQuaREs  program  “Deep  learning  and  quantum  Monte
Carlo” in 2021.


                                        Appendix A: Hyperparameters

  In  Table  III  we  list  the  hyperparameters  used  in  our  runs  for  the  KFAC  optimizer.   For  the
stretched  N2  geometry,  to  replicate  the  results  reported  by  Ref.  [9]  as  closely  as  possible,  4000
walkers were used instead of 2000, a two-electron stream width of 32 was used instead of 16, and
when it resulted in lower energies, pretraining was also used for 1000 iterations.


                                       Appendix B: Code benchmarking

  To demonstrate that our results for the original FermiNet are comparable to those reported by
[9, 19], we show that results obtained using the VMCNet repository are quantitatively comparable
to that of the JAX branch of the FermiNet repository presented in [19] on several small systems.
We compare the behavior on both the nitrogen atom and the square H4  model (Figure 7), using
settings corresponding to the original FermiNet model in both repositories.  For the nitrogen atom,
we  compare  results  with  1,  2,  and  4  determinants,  while  for  the  H4  square  we  compare  results
with  just  1  and  2  determinants,  since  2  determinants  already  captures  essentially  100%  of  the
correlation  energy.   All  results  presented  here  come  from  our  own  numerical  experiments  with
either the VMCNet repository or the publicly available JAX branch of the FermiNet repository.
Since VMCNet does not support Hartree-Fock based pretraining, we turned this feature oﬀ in the
FermiNet repository to make the comparison fair.  Turning oﬀ pretraining reduces the consistency
of the FermiNet optimization on some systems.  In particular, when using multiple determinants
                                                                                                                                 25

                    Table III: Table of hyperparameters for KFAC used during training.

                                           Hyperparameter                                        Value
                        Dense nodes per layer in antisymmetrized part                   64
                          Layers per ResNet in antisymmetrized part                      2
                                    One-electron stream width                                  256
                                    Two-electron stream width                                  16
                              Number of layers in equivariant part                            4
                                Kernel initializers for dense layers                      orthogonal
                                 Bias initializers for dense layers                    random normal
                                   Backﬂow activation function                               tanh
                           ResNet antisymmetry activation function                     tanh
                             Jastrow (backﬂow) activation function                        gelu
                                         Number of walkers                                       2000
                                            Learning rate                               5  · 10−2/(1 + 10−4t)
                                               Optimizer                                             KFAC
                         Threshold constant for local energy clipping                    5.0
                                  MCMC steps between updates                               10
                     Training iterations (number of parameter updates)               2e5
                      Evaluation iterations (samples collected every 10)                2e5

 Table IV: Comparison of the VMCNet repository with the FermiNet repository on the nitrogen
atom, with 1, 2, and 4 determinants.  Data for 2 and 4 determinants represent the best of several
                   runs to account for run-to-run variance observed in both repositories.

              Repository       1 det          corr %          2 det          corr %          4 det          corr %
               VMCNet    -54.5864(1)  98.48(8)%  -54.58739(4)  99.02(2)%  -54.58891(4)  99.85(2)%
              FermiNet   -54.58654(5)  98.56(3)%  -54.58711(6)  98.87(3)%  -54.58870(4)  99.73(4)%


for the nitrogen atom, we found that some runs both of our own code and of the FermiNet code
without  pretraining  get  stuck  in  local  minima  and  never  reach  the  lowest  energy  possible.   This
phenomenon may merit further investigation.  For now, to account for this run-to-run variance, we
have taken the best of several runs for all multi-determinant experiments on the nitrogen atom.
   Representative training graphs can be found for the nitrogen atom in Figure 12 and for the H4
square in Figure 13.  The values of the ﬁnal energies obtained are presented in Tables IV and V,
respectively.  On both systems, the results of VMCNet are approximately equivalent to the results
of FermiNet.  The two repositories behave somewhat diﬀerently in the ﬁrst 1,000 epochs of training,
with VMCNet often optimizing more quickly in this regime.  However, the optimization trajectories
are largely indistinguishable by 10,000 epochs and the ﬁnal energies achieved are within a small
margin of error of each other in all cases.


     Appendix C: Numerical stability and computational cost of the antisymmetric layer

   One challenge we faced when training the generic antisymmetric architecture was the numerical
sign cancellation near the nodal hypersurface.  When computing FermiNet-GA in single precision,
we invariably encounted NaNs (not-a-number).  Some investigation revealed that the computation
                                                                                                                      26
















                      (a) 1 determinant                                      (b) 2 determinants















                                                  (c) 4 determinants

 Figure 12:  Training runs on VMCNet and FermiNet repositories with the FermiNet architecture
on the nitrogen atom.  At each epoch, rolling averages of the previous 10% of training epochs are
 shown here for clarity.  One epoch means one parameter update.  Data for 2 and 4 determinants
represent the best of several runs to account for run-to-run variance observed in both repositories.
















                      (a) 1 determinant                                      (b) 2 determinants

 Figure 13:  Training runs on VMCNet and FermiNet repositories with the FermiNet architecture
   on the H4 square.  At each epoch, rolling averages of the previous 10% of training epochs are
                     shown here for clarity.  One epoch means one parameter update.
                                                                                                                        27

Table V: Comparison of the VMCNet repository with the FermiNet repository on the H4 square,
                                            with 1 and 2 determinants.

                                       Repository       1 det             2 det
                                        VMCNet   -1.424531(7)  -1.438804(5)
                                        FermiNet   -1.424429(7)  -1.438796(5)

















     Figure 14:  Wall clock hours elapsed during training for the generic antisymmetry and the
factorized antisymmetrized of rank 1 with the backﬂow-based Jastrow for the boron, carbon, and
          nitrogen atoms.  The training was performed for 2× 105 epochs on 2 A100 GPUs.


of Ψ could yield slightly diﬀerent results depending on whether it was calculated during a simple
forward pass evaluation or a gradient calculation involving a forward and backward pass.  Due to
this numerical inconsistency, the Metropolis-Hastings procedure would sometimes sample points on
or extremely close to the nodal hypersurface.  To contend with this in our experiments,  we used
double  precision  end-to-end,  i.e.   converted  all  arrays  to  double  precision.   It  is  possible  that  a
more eﬃcient implementation might use double precision only in the antisymmetric layer or only
when  evaluating  the local  energy.  The use  of double  precision  led us  to use A100  GPUs,  which
have signiﬁcantly better performance for these higher precision calculations than consumer GTX
GPUs.  We used GTX 2080TI GPUs for our experiments which did not require double precision.
Despite these powerful GPUs, the unfavorable scaling of the brute-force antisymmetry meant that
we  reached  the  limits  of  our  group’s  resources  with  the  calculations  on  the  oxygen  atom.   On  4
A100  GPUs,  training  the  FermiNet-GA  architecture  with  the  simpliﬁed  Jastrow  on  the  oxygen
atom  took  137  hours.   In  Figure  14,  we  show  the  wall  clock  time  used  to  train  the  generic  and
factorized antisymmetric architectures for boron through nitrogen.



                    Appendix D: Basis set extrapolation for the square H4 model

  The Hartree-Fock (HF) and full conﬁguration interaction (FCI) values for the square H4 model
were extrapolated to the complete basis limit using cc-pvXz basis sets using PySCF [58, 59].  For
completeness, we reproduce the details of the extrapolation here.
                                                                                                                         28

  The complete basis set Hartree-Fock energies were obtained by a ﬁt to the function
                                      EHF(X) =EHF(CBS) +a exp(−bX),                                         (D1)

whereEHF(X) is the Hartree-Fock energy computed with cc-pvXz and the parametersEHF(CBS),a,
andb are determined with a non-linear least-squares ﬁt.  Similarly, the complete basis set correlation
energies are obtained by a ﬁt to the function
                                         Ecorr(X) =Ecorr(CBS) +aX−3,                                             (D2)

where Ecorr(X) is the diﬀerence between the FCI and Hartree-Fock energies on the cc-pvXz basis
and the parameters Ecorr(CBS) and a are determined with a non-linear least-squares ﬁt.
  For RHF/UHF at bond length 1.0, we used X = 2, 3, 4, 5, as the orbital overlap matrix became
too  ill-conditioned  for  larger X.   For  RHF/UHF  at  bond  length  4.0,  we  used  X  =  5, 6, 8.   The
FCI calculations were done using restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) as the initial reference, and the
correlation  energy  was  computed  as  the  diﬀerence  between  the  FCI  and  RHF  energies.   For  the
extrapolation of the RHF-FCI correlation energy we used X = 3, 4.  Due to the relative unreliability
of the data points from the small double-zeta basis set and the cost of the quintuple-zeta basis set,
these points were not included in the extrapolation for the correlation energy.  Judging simply from
the square root of the variance of the parameter ﬁt, the basis set extrapolation error is at least two
orders of magnitude larger than that of the Monte Carlo error in the estimates of the VMC-derived
energies, so fewer signiﬁcant digits are reported for the RHF/UHF/FCI results.


                                       Appendix E: Gradient calculation

  In  this  section  we  derive  an  unbiased  estimate  for  the  gradient  of  the  expected  energy  of  the
wavefunction.  Recall that the expected energy is given by
                                                     ∫ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 dR
                                           L(θ) =          ∫|Ψθ|2 dR   .                                                (E1)

For  the  purposes  of  the  following  derivation,  we  will  let θ  be  a  real  number  representing  any
parameter.  The derivative of the integrand in the denominator with respect to θ is
                                                                     (∂θΨθ               )
                        ∂θ|Ψθ|2 = (∂θΨθ)Ψ∗θ + Ψθ(∂θΨ∗θ) =                Ψθ   + ∂θΨ∗θΨ∗θ    |Ψθ|2,                       (E2)

and the derivative of the integrand in the numerator with respect to θ is
                              [
                           ∂θ   EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2]       =∂θ [Ψ∗θHΨθ]
                                                    =∂θΨ∗θHΨθ + Ψ∗θH∂θΨθ                                              (E3)

                                                    = ∂θΨ∗θΨ∗θ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 + Ψ∗θH∂θΨθ

To treat the latter term in the last expression above, we also take advantage of the following identity,
which uses the essential self-adjointness of the Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian H [60]:
                  ∫                         ∫                          ∫ ∂θΨθ
                     Ψ∗θ(H∂θΨθ)dR =             ∂θΨθ(HΨ∗θ)dR =              Ψθ EL(R;θ)∗|Ψθ|2 dR               (E4)
                                                                                                                      29

Using these facts, the following calculation gives the derivative of the expected energyL with respect
to θ:
                    ∫ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 dR
     ∂θL(θ) =∂θ           ∫|Ψθ|2 dR
                                                  ∫ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 dR         ∂θ∫|Ψθ|2 dR
              = ∂θ∫ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 dR∫|Ψθ|2 dR   −        ∫|Ψθ|2 dR            ∫|Ψθ|2 dR
                  ∫ ((∂θΨ∗θ/Ψ∗θ)EL(R;θ) + (∂θΨθ/Ψθ)EL(R;θ)∗)|Ψθ|2 dR
              =                              ∫|Ψθ|2 dR                                                             (E5)
                    ∫ EL(R;θ)|Ψθ|2 dR         ∫ (∂θΨ∗θ/Ψ∗θ +∂θΨθ/Ψθ)|Ψθ|2 dR
                 −        ∫|Ψθ|2 dR                         ∫|Ψθ|2 dR
                  ∫ [(∂θΨ∗θ/Ψ∗θ)(EL(R;θ)−L(θ)) + (∂θΨθ/Ψθ)(EL(R;θ)∗−L(θ))]|Ψθ|2 dR
              =                                         ∫|Ψθ|2 dR                     .

When the wavefunction is real, we may simplify this to
                                        ∫ 2(∂θΨθ/Ψθ)(EL(R;θ)−L(θ))|Ψθ|2 dR
                            ∂θL(θ) =                       ∫|Ψθ|2 dR          .                             (E6)

We may then use Monte Carlo sampling to estimate the gradient as
                             ∂θL(θ)≈   1       ∑     2(∂θ log|Ψθ|)(EL(R;θ)−  ˜L(θ))                               (E7)
                                          |ξθ| R∈ξθ

where ξθ are a set of samples from the density pθ(R) =|Ψθ(R)|2/∫|Ψθ(R)|2 dR.


                               Appendix F: Sampling and gradient clipping

  We use the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to sample electron conﬁgurations from the distribution
deﬁned  by  Ψ(X).   We  use  a  gaussian  proposal  function  with  an  isotropic  step  width,  which  we
dynamically update throughout the optimization in order to keep the average acceptance ratio near
a target value, for which we use 0.5.  We maintain this ratio through a simple scheme that increases
the  step  width  by  a  small  amount  if  the  acceptance  ratio  strays  too  far  above  the  target,  and
similarly decreases it by a small amount if the ratio strays too far below the target.  We perform
such updates every 100 moves, averaging the acceptance ratio over the previous hundred steps in
order to avoid overzealously updating the step width due to noise in the acceptance ratio.
  In order to reduce the amount of correlation between the samples used for subsequent parameter
updates, we take 10 walker steps between each gradient calculation and parameter update.  While
skipping  steps  theoretically  does  not  produce  a  higher  eﬀective  sample  size  than  simply  using
every  step,  it is  practically  beneﬁcial to  skip  steps  because  the  local  energy  calculation  required
for  a  parameter  update  is  signiﬁcantly  more  computationally  expensive  than  the  wave  function
amplitude calculation required for each move.  This means we can take a number of intermediate
steps in order to produce signiﬁcantly less correlated samples with a small computational overhead.
  As is common in quantum Monte Carlo [61], in order to reduce the noise in the training process,
we  additionally  clip  the  local  energies  calculated  in  each  batch  of  samples  to  be  closer  to  some
                                                                                                                             30

       Table VI: Numerical results for comparison of factorized antisymmetry of rank K with
                     K-determinant FermiNet for K = 1, 2, 3, 4 on the nitrogen atom.

          FA-K, one-body Jastrow   corr%   FA-K, backﬂow Jastrow   corr% K-det.  FermiNet   corr%
  K=1            54.58637(4)            98.47(2)           -54.58664(4)           98.61(2)      -54.5864(1)      98.48(8)
  K=2           -54.58715(4)           98.89(2)           -54.58733(4)           98.99(2)     -54.58739(4)     99.02(2)
  K=3           -54.58803(3)           99.37(1)                    –                         –           -54.58817(4)     99.44(2)
  K=4           -54.58855(5)           99.65(3)                    –                         –           -54.58891(4)     99.85(2)


estimator of the energy intended to reduce the eﬀect of outliers in the gradient.  Speciﬁcally, given a
batch of local energiesE1,E2,...,En, we calculate the median local energyEM  and then calculate
the average deviation from the median (total variation) as
                                                TV  =  1    ∑|Ei−EM|.                                                    (F1)
                                                         n   i

We then replace Ei with EM  whenever|Ei−EM| > 5·TV .  In practice, we have found that this
produces a less noisy and more eﬀective optimization process than including all of the unclipped
local energies.  During the ﬁnal Monte Carlo evaluation of the energy after training, no local energy
clipping is performed in order to avoid bias in the energy estimate.


                         Appendix G: Factorized antisymmetry versus FermiNet

  We record the numerical results comparing FermiNet-FA-K to the standardK-determinant Fer-
miNet in Table VI, also shown in Figure 4.  Due to the limits of our computational resources, we
did not compute the K = 3, 4 results for FA-K with the backﬂow-based Jastrow.


                                   Appendix H: Stretched nitrogen molecule

  We  record  the  numerical  results  comparing  various  FermiNet  architectures  on  the  nitrogen
molecule  with  bond  length  4.0  Bohr  in  Table  VII.  These  results  are  also  depicted  in  Figure  11.
As noted in Appendix A, we use 4000 walkers and used runs both with and without pretraining
on  the  FermiNet  repository  in  order  to  replicate  the  previously  reported  results  in  [9]  as  closely
as possible.  The parameters were reloaded and evaluated using the VMCNet repository to ensure
reproducibility and to evaluate the quality of the sampling procedure.  The UCCSD(T) and Pfau
et al.  results were extracted from Figure 5 in [9].





 [1]G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural networks,
     Science 355, 602–606 (2017).
 [2]Y. Nomura, A. S. Darmawan, Y. Yamaji, and M. Imada, Restricted boltzmann machine learning for
     solving strongly correlated quantum systems, Phys. Rev. B 96, 205152 (2017).
 [3]K. Choo, G. Carleo, N. Regnault, and T. Neupert, Symmetries and many-body excitations with neural-
     network quantum states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 167204 (2018).
                                                                                                                                   31

   Table VII: Comparison of FermiNet architectures on the nitrogen molecule with bond length
stretched to 4.0.  The experimental result is computed from the MLR4(6, 8) ﬁtted potential curve
                                          recommended by the authors of [62].

                                                                                     energy
                                      RHF                                                -108.3101
                                      FermiNet, 1 det                               -109.1827
                                      FermiNet, 16 dets                            -109.1891
                                      FermiNet, 16 dets (Pfau et al.  [9])  -109.1903
                                      FermiNet, 32 dets (Pfau et al.  [9])  -109.1913
                                      FermiNet, 64 dets (Pfau et al.  [9])  -109.1908
                                      FermiNet, 1 full det                        -109.1940
                                      UCCSD(T) (Pfau et al.  [9])            -109.1898
                                      r12-MR-ACPF [56]                          -109.1947
                                      experiment [62]                               -109.2021




 [4]A. Nagy and V. Savona, Variational quantum monte carlo method with a neural-network ansatz for
     open quantum systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 250501 (2019).
 [5]D. Luo and B. K. Clark, Backﬂow transformations via neural networks for quantum many-body wave
     functions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 226401 (2019).
 [6]J. Han, L. Zhang, and W. E, Solving many-electron schr¨odinger equation using deep neural networks,
     Journal of Computational Physics 399, 108929 (2019).
 [7]L.  Yang,  Z.  Leng,  G.  Yu,  A.  Patel,  W.-J.  Hu,  and  H.  Pu,  Deep  learning-enhanced  variational
     monte  carlo  method  for  quantum  many-body  physics,  Physical  Review  Research  2,  10.1103/phys-
     revresearch.2.012039 (2020).
 [8]J. Hermann, Z. Sch¨atzle, and F. No´e, Deep-neural-network solution of the electronic schr¨odinger equa-
     tion, Nature Chemistry 12, 891–897 (2020).
 [9]D. Pfau, J. S. Spencer, A. G. D. G. Matthews, and W. M. C. Foulkes, Ab initio solution of the many-
     electron schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks, Physical Review Research 2, 10.1103/phys-
     revresearch.2.033429 (2020).
[10]K. Choo, A. Mezzacapo, and G. Carleo, Fermionic neural-network states for ab-initio electronic struc-
     ture, Nature Communications 11, 2368 (2020).
[11]J. Stokes, J. R. Moreno, E. A. Pnevmatikakis, and G. Carleo, Phases of two-dimensional spinless lattice
     fermions with ﬁrst-quantized deep neural-network quantum states, Phys. Rev. B 102, 205122 (2020).
[12]A. Szabo and N. Ostlund,       Modern Quantum Chemistry:  Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure
     Theory  (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989).
[13]R. P. Feynman and M. Cohen, Energy spectrum of the excitations in liquid helium, Phys. Rev.      102,
     1189 (1956).
[14]L. F. Tocchio, F. Becca, A. Parola, and S. Sorella, Role of backﬂow correlations for the nonmagnetic
                         ′  hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 78, 041101 (2008).
     phase of the t–t
[15]W.  M.  C.  Foulkes,  L.  Mitas,  R.  J.  Needs,  and  G.  Rajagopal,  Quantum  monte  carlo  simulations  of
     solids, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 33 (2001).
[16]J. Gubernatis, N. Kawashima, and P. Werner,       Quantum Monte Carlo Methods (Cambridge Univ. Pr.,
     2016).
[17]J.  Toulouse,  R.  Assaraf,  and  C.  J.  Umrigar,  Chapter  ﬁfteen  -  introduction  to  the  variational  and
     diﬀusion  monte  carlo  methods,  in  Electron  Correlation  in  Molecules  –  ab  initio  Beyond  Gaussian
     Quantum Chemistry, Advances in Quantum Chemistry, Vol. 73, edited by P. E. Hoggan and T. Ozdogan
     (Academic Press, 2016) pp. 285–314.
                                                                                                                                   32

[18]F. Becca and S. Sorella,       Quantum Monte Carlo Approaches for Correlated Systems  (Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 2017).
[19]J.  S.  Spencer,  D.  Pfau,  A.  Botev,  and  W.  M.  C.  Foulkes,  Better,  faster  fermionic  neural  networks
     (2020), arXiv:2011.07125 [physics.comp-ph].
[20]J.  Han,  Y.  Li,  L.  Lin,  J.  Lu,  J.  Zhang,  and  L.  Zhang,  Universal  approximation  of  symmetric  and
     anti-symmetric functions, arXiv:1912.01765  (2019).
[21]A.   Sannai,   Y.   Takai,   and   M.   Cordonnier,   Universal   approximations   of   permutation   invari-
     ant/equivariant functions by deep neural networks, arXiv:1903.01939  (2019).
[22]N.  Keriven  and  G.  Peyr´e,  Universal  invariant  and  equivariant  graph  neural  networks,  Advances  in
     Neural Information Processing Systems 32, 7092 (2019).
[23]M.  Hutter,       On  Representing  (Anti)Symmetric  Functions,  Tech.  Rep.  arXiv:2007.15298  (DeepMind,
     London, UK, 2020).
[24]M.  Bachmayr,   G.  Dusson,  and  C.  Ortner,  Polynomial  approximation  of  symmetric  functions,
     arXiv:2109.14771  (2021).
[25]M. Zaheer, S. Kottur, S. Ravanbakhsh, B. Poczos, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and A. J. Smola, Deep sets,
     in Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 30 (2017) pp. 3391–3401.
[26]J. Kessler,  F. Calcavecchia, and T. D. K¨uhne, Artiﬁcial neural networks as trial wave functions for
     quantum monte carlo, Advanced Theory and Simulations 4, 2000269 (2021).
[27]K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in       Proceedings of
     the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition  (2016) pp. 770–778.
[28]T. Kato, On the eigenfunctions of many-particle systems in quantum mechanics, Commun. Pure Appl.
     Math. 10, 151 (1957).
[29]A. R. Barron, Approximation and estimation bounds for artiﬁcial neural networks, Machine Learning
     14, 115 (1994).
[30]A.  Pinkus,  Approximation  theory  of  the  mlp  model  in  neural  networks,  Acta  Numerica      8,  143–195
     (1999).
[31]D. Rolnick and M. Tegmark, The power of deeper networks for expressing natural functions, in       Inter-
     national Conference on Learning Representations  (2018).
[32]D. Elbr¨achter, D. Perekrestenko, P. Grohs, and H. B¨olcskei, Deep neural network approximation theory
     (2021), arXiv:1901.02220 [cs.LG].
[33]H. W. Lin, M. Tegmark, and D. Rolnick, Why does deep and cheap learning work so well?, Journal of
     Statistical Physics 168, 1223–1247 (2017).
[34]D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, Gaussian error linear units (gelus) (2016), arXiv:1606.08415 [cs.LG].
[35]D.  Bressanini  and  P.  J.  Reynolds,  Between  classical  and  quantum  monte  carlo  methods:   “vari-
     ational”  qmc,  in  Advances  in  Chemical  Physics   (John  Wiley  &  Sons,   Ltd,  1999)  pp.  37–64,
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9780470141649.ch3.
[36]R. L. Coldwell, Zero monte carlo error or quantum mechanics is easier, International Journal of Quan-
     tum Chemistry 12, 215 (1977), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/qua.560120826.
[37]C. J. Umrigar, K. G. Wilson, and J. W. Wilkins, Optimized trial wave functions for quantum monte
     carlo calculations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1719 (1988).
[38]P. R. C. Kent, R. J. Needs, and G. Rajagopal, Monte carlo energy and variance-minimization techniques
     for optimizing many-body wave functions, Phys. Rev. B 59, 12344 (1999).
[39]C. J. Umrigar and C. Filippi, Energy and variance optimization of many-body wave functions, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 94, 150201 (2005).
[40]C. Umrigar and C. Filippi, Energy and variance optimization of many-body wave functions, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 94, 150201 (2005).
[41]E.  Neuscamman,  C.  Umrigar,  and  G.  K.-L.  Chan,  Optimizing  large  parameter  sets  in  variational
     quantum monte carlo, Phys. Rev. B 85, 045103 (2012).
[42]L. Otis and E. Neuscamman, Complementary ﬁrst and second derivative methods for ansatz optimiza-
     tion in variational monte carlo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 21, 14491 (2019).
[43]I.  Sabzevari,  A.  Mahajan,  and  S.  Sharma,  An  accelerated  linear  method  for  optimizing  non-linear
     wavefunctions in variational monte carlo, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 024111 (2020).
                                                                                                                                   33

[44]J. Martens and R. Grosse, Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curvature,
     in  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning,  Proceedings  of  Machine
     Learning Research, Vol. 37 (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 2408–2417.
[45]D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam:  A method for stochastic optimization, in       International  Conference
     on Learning Representations  (2015).
[46]S.-i. Amari, Natural gradient works eﬃciently in learning, Neural Computation      10, 251 (1998).
[47]S.-i. Amari and H. Nagaoka, Methods of information geometry (Oxford University Press, 2000).
[48]J. Stokes, J. Izaac, N. Killoran, and G. Carleo, Quantum Natural Gradient, Quantum      4, 269 (2020).
[49]J. Lin, G. Goldshlager, and L. Lin, VMCNet: Flexible, general-purpose VMC framework, built on JAX
     (2021).
[50]J.   Bradbury,   R.   Frostig,   P.   Hawkins,   M.   J.   Johnson,   C.   Leary,   D.   Maclaurin,   G.   Necula,
     A.  Paszke,  J.  VanderPlas,  S.  Wanderman-Milne,  and  Q.  Zhang,  JAX:  composable  transformations
     of Python+NumPy programs (2018).
[51]  https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/kfac_ferminet_alpha.
[52]S. J. Chakravorty, S. R. Gwaltney, E. R. Davidson, F. A. Parpia, and C. F. p Fischer, Ground-state
     correlation energies for atomic ions with 3 to 18 electrons, Phys. Rev. A 47, 3649 (1993).
[53]K. Jankowski and J. Paldus, Applicability of coupled-pair theories to quasidegenerate electronic states:
     A model study, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 18, 1243 (1980).
[54]D. M. Ceperley, Fermion nodes, Journal of statistical physics      63, 1237 (1991).
[55]  https://youtu.be/67SQXEUCYyY.
[56]R. J. Gdanitz, Accurately solving the electronic schr¨odinger equation of atoms and molecules using
     explicitly  correlated  (r12-)mr-ci:   the  ground  state  potential  energy  curve  of  n2,  Chemical  Physics
     Letters 283, 253 (1998).
[57]J. W. Negele and H. Orland,       Quantum many-particle systems  (Westview, 1988).
[58]Q.  Sun,  T.  C.  Berkelbach,  N.  S.  Blunt,  G.  H.  Booth,  S.  Guo,  Z.  Li,  J.  Liu,  J.  D.  McClain,  E.  R.
     Sayfutyarova,  S.  Sharma,  S.  Wouters,  and  G.  K.-L.  Chan,  Pyscf:   the  python-based  simulations  of
     chemistry framework, WIREs Computational Molecular Science 8, e1340 (2018).
[59]Q. Sun, X. Zhang, S. Banerjee, P. Bao, M. Barbry, N. S. Blunt, N. A. Bogdanov, G. H. Booth, J. Chen,
     Z.-H. Cui, J. J. Eriksen, Y. Gao, S. Guo, J. Hermann, M. R. Hermes, K. Koh, P. Koval, S. Lehtola, Z. Li,
     J. Liu, N. Mardirossian, J. D. McClain, M. Motta, B. Mussard, H. Q. Pham, A. Pulkin, W. Purwanto,
     P. J. Robinson, E. Ronca, E. R. Sayfutyarova, M. Scheurer, H. F. Schurkus, J. E. T. Smith, C. Sun, S.-
     N. Sun, S. Upadhyay, L. K. Wagner, X. Wang, A. White, J. D. Whitﬁeld, M. J. Williamson, S. Wouters,
     J. Yang, J. M. Yu, T. Zhu, T. C. Berkelbach, S. Sharma, A. Y. Sokolov, and G. K.-L. Chan, Recent
     developments in the pyscf program package, The Journal of Chemical Physics 153, 024109 (2020).
[60]M.  Reed  and  B.  Simon,        II:  Fourier  Analysis,  Self-Adjointness  (Methods  of  Modern  Mathematical
     Physics, Volume 2) (Academic Press, 1975).
[61]C. J. Umrigar, M. P. Nightingale, and K. J. Runge, A diﬀusion monte carlo algorithm with very small
     time-step errors, The Journal of Chemical Physics 99, 2865 (1993).
[62]R.  J.  Le  Roy,  Y.  Huang,  and  C.  Jary,  An  accurate  analytic  potential  function  for  ground-state  n2
     from a direct-potential-ﬁt analysis of spectroscopic data, The Journal of Chemical Physics 125, 164310
     (2006).