   Hierarchical autoregressive neural networks for statistical systems

                                  Piotr Bia lasa, Piotr Korcylb, Tomasz Stebelb

   aInstitute of Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, ul.   Lojasiewicza 11, 30-348 Krak´ow Poland
       bInstitute of Theoretical Physics, Jagiellonian University, ul.   Lojasiewicza 11, 30-348 Krak´ow Poland





Abstract
It  was  recently  proposed  that  neural  networks  could  be  used  to  approximate  many-dimensional
probability distributions that appear e.g.  in lattice ﬁeld theories or statistical mechanics.  Subse-
quently they can be used as variational approximators to asses extensive properties of statistical
systems, like free energy, and also as neural samplers used in Monte Carlo simulations.  The prac-
tical  application  of  this  approach  is  unfortunately  limited  by  its  unfavorable  scaling  both  of  the
numerical cost required for training, and the memory requirements with the system size.  This is
due to the fact that the original proposition involved a neural network of width which scaled with
the total number of degrees of freedom, e.g. L2 in case of a two dimensional L×L lattice.  In this
work we propose a hierarchical association of physical degrees of freedom, for instance spins, to neu-
rons which replaces it with the scaling with the linear extent L of the system.  We demonstrate our
approach on the two-dimensional Ising model by simulating lattices of various sizes up to 128× 128
spins,  with  time  benchmarks  reaching  lattices  of  size  512× 512.   We  observe  that  our  proposal
improves the quality of neural network training, i.e.  the approximated probability distribution is
closer to the target that could be previously achieved.  As a consequence, the variational free energy
reaches a value closer to its theoretical expectation and, if applied in a Markov Chain Monte Carlo
algorithm, the resulting autocorrelation time is smaller.  Finally, the replacement of a single neural
network by a hierarchy of smaller networks considerably reduces the memory requirements.
Keywords:   Variational Autoregressive Neural Networks, Hierarchical Neural Networks, Spin
Systems, Ising model, Markov Chain Monte Carlo


1.  Introduction

    In Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulations the main obstacle in improving the statistical pre-
cision  are  the  autocorrelations  between  consecutive  samples.   The  recent  idea  [1,  2]  to  alleviate
this problem is based on the introduction of artiﬁcial neural networks which can be trained to ap-
proximate the target probability distribution.  In such situation the next sample can be generated
independently by the neural network instead of relying on local updates of the previous sample.  If
the probability distribution parametrized by the neural network is suﬃciently close to the target
probability distribution most of the proposals would be accepted and the autocorrelations would
be  reduced.   This  algorithm,  called  Neural  Markov  Chain  Monte  Carlo  (NMCMC),  was  studied



    Email addresses:  piotr.bialas@uj.edu.pl (Piotr Bia las), piotr.korcyl@uj.edu.pl (Piotr Korcyl),
tomasz.stebel@uj.edu.pl (Tomasz Stebel)



Preprint submitted to Computer Physics Communications                                                                November 17, 2022
in details in Ref. [3] using the two-dimensional Ising model as the testbed.  It was conﬁrmed that
the critical slowing down can be much milder than in the local Metropolis algorithm [4].  Similar
conclusions concerning the NMCMC autocorrelation times, in systems with continuous degrees of
freedom, were reported earlier in Ref.  [5].
    The work of Ref. [2] was based on a previous observation that autoregressive neural networks
can be applied to estimate extensive observables in statistical physics, in particular the free energy,
which can be directly related to the Kulback–Leibler divergence, see [6] for details.  More recently
that observation, reformulated in terms of normalising ﬂows in order to accommodate continuous
degrees of freedom, was applied to the popular elementary particle model of scalar φ4 ﬁeld theory
in two-dimensions in Ref. [7].  This may be considered as true progress since estimating the free
energy of a system with discrete or continuous degrees of freedom is a notoriously diﬃcult problem
for standard Monte Carlo approaches.  Another application of autoregressive neural networks was
reported in Ref. [8].
    Staying in the context of systems with discrete degrees of freedom, the main obstacle in scaling
the  NMCMC  approach  or  the  variational  estimation  of  the  free  energy,  to  system  sizes  relevant
from the point of view of particle or statistical physics is the numerical cost of the approach which
dramatically increases with the system size.  Most of the published results used the maximal lattice
ofL×L = 16× 16 degrees of freedom.  In this work we describe a mapping of the physical degrees
of freedom to the inputs of a set of neural networks which considerably reduces the numerical cost.
We demonstrate our approach on the two-dimensional Ising model where we simulate a system of
128× 128 spins as a test of validity of our idea.  Compared to the original approach described in
Ref. [6] which is valid for any system with discrete degrees of freedom, our algorithm is applicable
only to systems with nearest-neighbour interactions and it relies on the well-known Hammersley-
Cliﬀord theorem [9, 10] and Markov ﬁeld property of the Ising model.
    As suggested by Ref. [6], the prohibitive scaling might be eliminated by replacing fully-connected
layers by convolutional ones in the employed architecture of neural network.  Convolutional layers
proved their superiority in applications where the translational symmetry is expected on the level
of input data.  This is, however, not the case in the context of autoregressive networks discussed
here, as neurons represent conditional probabilities of consecutive physical degrees of freedom and
there  is  no  symmetry  on  the  level  of  conditional  probabilities.   In  particular,  the  association  of
physical  spins  to  consecutive  neurons  is  arbitrary  and  can  even  be  random.   This  implies  that
the  neighbouring  neurons  do  not  necessarily  correspond  to  spins  which  are  close  to  each  other
on  the  physical  lattice.   This  means  that  convolutional  layers  do  not  enforce  the  translational
symmetry  any  more  in  this  case.   In  fact  they  may  even  break  it.   Fully  connected  layers  also
do not enforce translational symmetry,  but at least in theory can be trained to respect it.  Note
that in convolutional architectures the number of layers must scale like L to fully account for all
dependencies in conditional probabilities.  It was shown in Ref. [6] that fully connected architectures
are  much  faster  than  convolutional  layers  when  actual  run  times  are  compared.   Hence,  in  the
following  we  do  not  consider  convolutional  layers  as  a  viable  solution  for  this  particular  class  of
problems.
    As announced, we present our idea using the two-dimensional ferromagnetic Ising model with
N  =L2 spins which are located on a L×L periodic lattice.  The system is fully characterized by
the Hamiltonian operator which provides the energy of a given conﬁguration of spins s ={si}Ni=1

                                                 H(s) =−J∑           sisj,                                                         (1)
                                                                ⟨i,j⟩


                                                             2
where the sum runs over all neighbouring pairs of lattice sites.  We set the coupling constant J = 1.
Each conﬁguration s appears with the Boltzmann probability

                                               p(s) =  1Z exp(−βH(s)),                                                      (2)

where Z  is  the  partition  function Z  = ∑s exp(−βH(s))  and  the  sum  is  performed  over  all  2N
conﬁgurations.

2.  Conditional probabilities and autoregressive networks

    In the approach discussed in earlier works [2, 6] a neural network was proposed to model the
probabilityp(s).  To this endp(s) was rewritten as a product of conditional probabilities of consec-
utive spins,
                                                          N∏
                                          p(s) =p(s1)         p(si|s1,...,si−1)                                               (3)
                                                         i=2
The neural network is used to model the conditional probabilities p(si|·) by approximating it by
qθ(s).  Then,
                                                          N∏
                                       qθ(s) =qθ(s1)          qθ(si|s1,...,si−1),                                             (4)
                                                          i=2
where qθ  are  quantities  returned  by  the  neural  network.   In  the  simplest  realization,  the  neural
network has N  input and output neurons and the value of the i-th output neuron is interpreted
as qθ(si  =  +1|s1,s2,...,si−1),  where  we  explicitly  marked  the  dependence  of q  on  the  internal
parameters θ of the neural network.  In order to ensure that the conditional probabilities depend
only on the values of the preceding spins one uses autoregressive neural network, where the neural
connections are only allowed to the neurons associated to the preceding spins.
    Knowing the target probability of the spin conﬁguration, p(s) and its value approximated by
the neural network,qθ(s), the training of the neural network is performed by minimizing the inverse
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence,

                DKL(qθ|p) =∑           qθ(s) (logqθ(s)− logp(s)) =E[logqθ(s)− logp(s)]qθ(s).                (5)
                                   s
As we usually do not know the normalization factorZ, by inserting the target probabilityp without
the normalization factor 1/Z into the inverse KL divergence DKL(qθ|p) we get

                         Fq =E[logqθ(s)− logp(s)− logZ)]qθ(s) =F +DKL(qθ|p),                           (6)

where F  =− logZ is the true free energy which does not depend on the neural network weights θ,
and Fq  its variational approximation.  Hence, minimization of DKL(qθ|p) is equivalent to pushing
the value of Fq  towards the true value F  from above.  This approach of using neural networks as
a  functional  ansatz  for  variational  minimization  is  known  as  variational  autoregressive  networks
(VAN) [6].  During the trainingFq can approximated by the arithmetic average overn (called batch
size, for which we use the value 1024) samples generated from the distribution qθ,

                                                  n∑
                               Fq≈  ˆFq =  1n        (logqθ(si) +βH(si)),    si∼qθ.                                  (7)
                                                i=1

                                                              3
This quantity is minimized during the network training.  Its gradient estimator is calculated as [6]
                                                                                                  
    d ˆFq        n∑  d logqθ(si)                                      n∑
     dθ   =  1n           dθ       (logqθ(si) +βH(si))− 1n              (logqθ(sj) +βH(sj)),    si∼qθ.     (8)

                i=1                                                  j=1

Network weights are updated using Adam optimizer[11].
    The generation of samples is done via ancestral sampling.  We generate spins one by one starting
from s1.  Once spins s1,...,si−1 are generated they are used as an input to the network to obtain
the  conditional  probability qθ(si  =  +1|s1,...,si−1)  according  to  which  the  spin si  is  generated
and the process is continued.  Clearly this requires calling the network L2 times and is the biggest
drawback of this approach.  As we are unable to reduce this number, in this contribution we limit
ourselves to the reduction of the workload required by a single call of the network.
    In  order  to  understand  the  scaling  of  the  numerical  cost  of  the  VAN  approach  and  compare
it  to  our  approach  we  take  as  our  measure  two  numbers:  the  approximate  number  of  trainable
parameters of the autoregressive neural network which is proportional to the memory utilization
and  the  approximate  number  of  ﬂoating  point  operations  needed  to  generate  one  conﬁguration
of  spins  which  characterizes  the  numerical  eﬀort.   The  actual  run  times,  which  depend  on  the
implementation  and  on  the  hardware  used,  are  discussed  in  Section  5.   In  order  to  simplify  the
discussion we assume that neural networks are composed of a single fully-connected layer as this
is suﬃcient for our aims of comparing the two approaches, i.e.  including ml layers approximately
multiplies the number of parameters and of ﬂoating point operations byml.  We further assume that
this layer has same number of input and output neurons i.e.  it looks like the lower layer in Fig. 2.
Adding another layer with smaller number of output neurons does not change our conclusions about
scaling.  In what follows we consider large L≫ 1 and we keep only the leading power of L which is
denoted with the ”≈” sign.
    The original proposal of Ref. [6] assumed a single fully-connected neural network for all spins
and a mask in order to impose autoregressivity, which corresponds to L4 +L2 +L2≈L4 trainable
parameters.  The ﬁrst term counts the weights, the second corresponds to the bias on each neuron
and the third counts the parameters in the  PReLU activation function used in that Reference.  In
principle, one could exploit the triangular (autoregressive) structure of the weight matrix to reduce
the number of parameters by  12.  Additionally, one could as well implement another optimization
such as the chessboard factorization [3] and further reduce the scaling byL2→  12L2, giving in total
1
8L4 +L2.   Nevertheless,  the  number  of  trainable  parameters  would  still  increase  with  a  leading
scaling power of L4.  As far as the number of ﬂoating point operations is concerned,  in order to
generate one conﬁguration of spins we need to invoke the neural networkL2 times (number of spins
on the lattice) and each invocation has of the order of L4 ﬂoating point operations.  Hence, in total
the number of operations needed to generate of one conﬁguration scales asL6 in the VAN approach.
    In the following we propose to reorganize the neural network in such a way as to keep the same
expressivity, but reduce the number of parameters and hence considerably reduce the numerical cost
of the approach allowing us to simulate systems of size 64 times larger than the original proposal.
With much smaller neural networks our idea considerably reduces memory requirements.

3.  Boundary and interior spins

    We propose to divide the spins into two species:  boundary spins and interior spins, as demon-
strated in Fig. 1 (left) for periodic lattice.  For non-periodic lattice the only diﬀerence is the shape of


                                                             4
Figure 1:  Example of hierarchical partitioning for L = 16.  On the ﬁrst level, the red boundary B(0) highlighted on
the left panel of the ﬁgure is generated with one neural networkN 0.  At the second level of hierarchy, one neural
network of smaller sizeN1 is used to consecutively ﬁx four sets of boundaries shown in blue.  The example ofB(1),3 is
highlighted in the middle panel.  The surrounding spins∂B(1),3 are shown in orange.  At the third level of hierarchy,
one  neural  network  of  even  smaller  sizeN2  is  used  to  consecutively  ﬁx  sixteen  sets  of  boundary  spins  marked  in
green.  The example of B(2),15 is highlighted in green on the right panel.  The remaining empty spins corresponding
to Ik≡B(3),k, k = 1,..., 64 have all the neighbours ﬁxed and therefore can be generated from a local Boltzmann
distribution with the heatbath algorithm.



























Figure  2:   Scaled  down  representation  of  the  architecture  of  the  smallest  neural  network  used  to  generate  green
sublattice  (Figure  1  right).   Orange  nodes  correspond  to  border  spins  and  green  nodes  to  interior  spins.   Orange
nodes are connected to every node of the subsequent layer.  Green nodes are connected in an autoregressive way.
The propagation of signals starts at the bottom of the ﬁgure and goes upward.  The real network used in this case
has nine orange input neurons and ﬁve green.





                                                                        5
the red boundary spins.  In the presented partitioning of a 16×16 lattice we obtain 60 red boundary
spins and four sublattices with 49 white interior spins each.  Each sublattice has boundaries ﬁxed
by a subset of red boundary spins.  The main advantage of such a partitioning is the following fact
which can be easily proven and is known as the Hammersley-Cliﬀord theorem:  for each sublattice,
once the boundary made of red spins is ﬁxed, the probabilities of interior spins  do  not  depend on
the values of the spins outside the surrounding red boundary.  This allows us to write p(s) as the
product
                                                                            4∏
                           p(s) =p(B(s))p(I(s)|B(s)) =p(B(s))                  p(Ia(s)|Ba(s)),                              (9)
                                                                          a=1
where the operation B, B(s), extracts the boundary spins from the conﬁguration s, whereas I, I(s)
the interior spins.  We explicitly indicated that the probabilities of interior spins are conditional
probabilities depending on the boundary spins.  Each individual factor can be further factorized as

                                                         NB∏
                                    p(B(s)) =p(s1B)          p(siB|s1B,s2B,...,si−1B   )                                      (10)
                                                         i=2
and
                                                  NI∏
                            p(Ia(s)|Ba(s)) =          p(sa,iI |sa,1I ,sa,2I ,...,sa,i−1I      ; Ba(s)).                             (11)
                                                  i=1
    At  this  point  we  can  use  two  neural  networks:  one  for  the  boundary  spins  and  one  for  the
interior spins.  The neural network for the boundary spins is of the same type as in the original
NMCMC  algorithm,  but  considerably  smaller,  its  width  is  4L− 4  and  hence  the  number  of  its
trainable  parameters  scales  as L2.   The  second  type  of  neural  network  used  to  parametrize  the
probabilities of the interior spins has ( 12L− 1)2 neurons corresponding to interior spins (white) and
2L−4 neurons corresponding to boundary spins (red), resulting in total of≈  14L2 of input neurons.
This network has a fully connected part from the boundary input neurons (orange) to all output
neurons, and an autoregressive part from interior input neurons to interior output neurons (green)
(see Figure 2).  Note that the  same neural network is needed for all 4 sublattices.  This may be
interpreted as introducing a substitute of translational symmetry into the approach.  However, we
implement it on the level of physical degrees of freedom where this symmetry is deﬁned, and not
on  the  level  of  conditional  probabilities,  as  would  convolutional  layers  do.   Calculating  the  total
number of trainable weights in this setup we still get the unfavorable scaling of L4 which originates
from the neural network used to generate the interior spins in the sublattices.  However, one can
easily improve on this, by applying the division into boundary and interior spins to each sublattice.
This will be described in the next Section.


4.  Hierarchical Autoregressive Networks (HAN)

    Based on the conclusion from the preceding Section, we describe an algorithm for spin generation
based on iterative division of the lattice into smaller sublattices.  Below we describe the procedure
and provide a pseudocode which illustrates the algorithm.
    We start again with the division of spins into boundary and interior spins (see the left panel of
Fig. 1).  The ﬁrst set of boundary spins is marked in red and we generate them as described in the
previous Section.  We denote these spins by B(0) where the upper index corresponds to the zeroth


                                                             6
step of consecutive iterations consisting of division and ﬁxing of spins.  Similarly, the corresponding
autoregressive neural network trained to ﬁx these spins is denoted byN 0.  The spins inB(0) do not
depend conditionally on any other variables. Now, once those spins are ﬁxed, we take each sublattice
and treat it as a new problem with ﬁxed boundaries.  Instead of directly generating all interior spins,
we iterate and divide it further into boundary and remaining spins.  The sets of boundary spins
B(1),k on each of the sublattices are marked in blue in the middle panel of Fig. 1.  One example of a
new set of spins at the second level of iteration, B(1),3, is highlighted .  We propose to use another
autoregressive neural network, calledN 1(∂B(1),k) to generate the blue boundary spins.  The main
advantage  of  our  approach  is  that  one  networkN 1  is  used  to  generate  all B(1),k, k  =  1, 2, 3, 4.
The probabilities of blue spins depend conditionally on the surrounding spins, we denote the latter
by ∂B(1).  The  middle panel  in  Fig. 1  shows  the example  of B(1),3  and  highlights in  orange the
surrounding spins belonging to∂B(1),k.  The geometry of the neural network which must be used in
this case has a fully connected part, an autoregressive part, with the values of the surrounding spins
playing the role of external parameters which is explicitly marked by the argument of the neural
networkN 1.   We  show  an  example  of  such  neural  network  in  Fig.  2.   Repeating  this  procedure
iteratively, we stop when  34L2  boundary spins (at diﬀerent levels of iterations) are generated and
the remaining  14L2 interior spins can be set by the heatbath step1 (see the the right panel of Fig. 1).
The heatbath algorithm may in principle be replaced by a further level in the hierarchy of neural
networks.  However, since that single spin can be generated with exact probability, we implement
that optimization directly.  We summarize these steps with the pseudocode presented in Algorithm
1.
  procedure HAN(β) ⊿ generate spin conﬁguration C  at given β
       deﬁne B(0)
       B(0)←N 0(void) ⊿ spins B(0)  are set byN 0  without any additional dependence
       C←B(0)
       for m = 1,..., log2L do
           for k = 1,..., 4m do
               deﬁne B(m),k ⊿ one set of blue sites on Fig.1 (middle)
               deﬁne ∂B(m),k ⊿ set of surrounding spins of B(m),k
               B(m),k←Nm(∂B(m),k) ⊿ spins B(m),k  are set byNm  depending on ∂B(m),k
       ⊿ only single spins remain unset, see white sites on Fig.1 (right)C←B(m),k

       I← HB(β,C) ⊿ ﬁx remaining spins with the heatbath algorithm
       C←I⊿   all spins are ﬁxed
       return C

                 Algorithm 1:  Iterative generation of all spins in a single conﬁguration.

     In  order  to  bound  the  numerical  cost  of  our  approach,  we  again  count  the  total  number  of
trainable parameters needed to describe a system of extent L = 2m =l(0), m> 1.  Again, we only
keep the leading powers of L, omitting the parameters hidden in the bias and activation functions.




   1In the heatbath algorithm we draw a spin from probability distribution ﬁxed by the values of its neighbours:
                                                                       [         (
probability of spin si to be +1 or−1 is equal q(si =±1,n(si)) =         1 + exp   ∓ 2β∑    j∈n(si)sj)]−1, where the sum
is performed over neighbours n(si).


                                                             7
The ﬁrst step diﬀers from the recursively deﬁned division into boundary and interior spins as it
needs to account for the periodic boundary conditions of the physical system.  We already discussed
that step and obtained N(0)p    = (4L− 4)2≈ 16L2 = 22m+4  parameters.  The resulting sublattices
have linear extent of l(1) =  12(l(0)− 2) = 2(m−1)− 1.
    If m >  2,  we  can  continue  this  process  and  divide  each  sublattice  by  generating  ﬁrst  a  new
set of boundary spins (blue spins in Fig. 1 middle) that divide each sublattice in four sublattices.
To this end we use a new neural network.  All blue spins in given sublattice depend conditionally
on  4l(1)  red  boundary  spins  which  surrounds  them  (orange  spins  in  Fig.  1  middle),  as  already
explained previously.  We have 2l(1)− 1 blue spins and hence the fully connected dense layer will
have N(1)p ≈ (6l(1)− 1)2≈ 9 22m parameters.  At each subsequent recursive partitioning, we ﬁnd a
sublattice of linear size                            (l(i−1)− 1) = 2m−i− 1                                               (12)
                                           l(i) = 12

and the number of trainable parameters of networkNi is

                                          N(i)p ≈ (6l(i)− 1)2≈ 9 22(m−i+1).                                             (13)

The recursion ends when l(i) = 3, hence i = m− 2.  Gathering the individual contributions from
each iteration we ﬁnally obtain

                                       m−2∑                         m−2∑
                               Np =          N(i)p ≈ 22m+4 + 9           22(m−i+1)≈ 28L2                                (14)
                                       i=0                          i=1

Therefore, the scaling of parameters number withL4 present in the original approach was completely
eliminated and replaced with L2.
    The number of ﬂoating point operations for the neural network at ith level of the hierarchy is a
product ofN(i)p   and number of network invocations (note that for each spin we need one invocation
of network):

                                        C(0) = (2m+2− 4)N(0)p ≈ 64 23m,                                               (15)
                                         C(i) = 4i(2l(i)− 1)N(i)p ≈ 72 23m−i.                                           (16)

Summing up these numbers we obtain the number of ﬂoating point operations for one layer,

                                                            m−2∑
                                            C =C(0) +            C(i)≈ 136L3,                                                (17)
                                                            i=1

compared to the∝L6 operations in the VAN approach.
    The numerical cost of calculating the probabilityq(s) of a conﬁguration which has been already
generated is given by,
                                                        m−2∑
                                       Cq =N(0)p    +        4iN(i)p ≈ 36L2 log2L,                                         (18)
                                                        i=1
since neural networks are invoked only once for each B(i),k.




                                                               8
Figure 3:  Time scaling of the VAN and HAN algorithms:  we show time of training for 100 epochs in both approaches
as function of system size L.  Approximate scaling as L2 for HAN and L6 for VAN can be seen for suﬃciently large
values of L (lines).


5.  Numerical results

    In  the  numerical  experiments  we  used  the  an  adaptation  of  the  PyTorch  implementation  of
autoregressive  layers  shared  by  the  authors  of  Ref.  [6].   All  neural  networks Ni  consist  of  two
densely connected layers with some connections removed. The architecture was schematically shown
in Fig. 2.  The neural network used to model the ﬁrst boundary spins does not have orange nodes.
First and second layers use PReLU and sigmoid activation functions respectively.
    As  a  demonstration  of  the  practical  impact  of  our  proposal  we  compared  our  approach  with
the  results  obtained  using  standard  VAN  from  Ref.  [6].   For  a  given  size  of  the  spin  lattice  we
measured  the  time  needed  to  perform  100  epochs  of  training  of  a  single  neural  network  (VAN)
and  the  hierarchy  of  autoregressive  networks  (HAN)  in  the  new  approach.   We  plot  the  results
obtained using a single V100 GPU in Fig. 3.  We checked that the time of all additional operations
is  negligible  compared  to  the  neural  network  evaluations.   We  notice  that  for  small  values  of L,
L≤ 16, VAN approach is faster and the time of both methods is comparable forL = 32.  For larger
systems the VAN approach scale approximately as L6.  As for the HAN approach we clearly see a
L2 scaling.  We checked that these times are saturated by the multiple invocations of the smallest
neural networks.  Hence, the visible L2  scaling can be associated with the overhead of numerous
GPU  kernel  invocations  (which  indeed  increases  as L2)  and  hides  the  expected  numerical  eﬀort
scaling.  Also for very small neural networks where the number of parameters is smaller then the
number of ALUs on the GPU (5120 for the V100) we expect that time for single network invocation
independent on network size.  Decreasing the number of GPU calls should further reduce the run
time of the HAN approach.  Still, for L> 32 already at this stage our proposal yields much faster
conﬁguration generation and training.
    What we also expect is that the quality of training is much better than in the variational ap-


                                                              9
Figure  4:  Relative  deviation  of  variational  free  energy  ˆFq  from  exact  value  as  a  function  of  the  neural  network
training time on lattices from L = 8 up to L = 128 obtained with the original and hierarchical algorithm.  A large
improvement can be observed for the new algorithm, as the precision of  ˆFq  is below 0.1%.


proach from Ref. [6].  Our recursive model for approximating the Boltzmann probability distribution
of spin conﬁgurations should allow to obtain a variational estimate of the free energy which is much
closer  to  the  exact  value F .   The  latter  is  obtained  using  known  analytical  expressions  for  Ising
model for given β and L, see Refs. [2, 12].
    In order to illustrate this we show in Fig. 4 the relative diﬀerence between the estimated free
energy and exact value, ( ˆFq−F )/|F|.  We plot it for several values of L and β = 0.44, where the
expected  phase  transition  is  approximately  located.   For  both  approaches  the  same β-annealing
algorithm  was  applied:  during  training  the  beta  was  changed  according  to β(epoch)  =  0.44(1−
0.996epoch).   We  checked  that  the  use  or  not  of β-annealing  does  not  eﬀect  the  ﬁnal  results  for
the free energy.   ˆFq  is estimated from the batch during training and is plotted together with its
statistical uncertainty.  In the original VAN (left panel in Fig. 4) the training of the neural network
needed to model the system of sizeL = 32 had diﬃculties to converge and yielded an approximation
of the free energy 1.5% away of the expected result.  On the contrary,  the HAN approach oﬀers
faster training and the discrepancy between the approximated free energy and the expected value
below 0.1% even for the system of size L = 128 (see right panel in Fig. 4).
    The results for  ˆFq  shown in Fig. 4 have been obtained with the Z2  symmetry (present in the
Ising  model)  imposed  during  training  as  explained  in  Ref.  [6]:  for  a  sampled  conﬁguration s,  it
requires replacement qθ(s)→ [qθ(s) +qθ(−s)]/2, where−s is obtained from s by ﬂipping all the
spins.  As it was mentioned in Ref. [6] inclusion ofZ2 signiﬁcantly improves training eﬃciency.  The
eﬀect of this symmetry was then further investigated in Ref. [3] by the present Authors, where we
have shown that imposing theZ2 leads to improvement of training only in the ordered state, namely
for β > 0.44.  For the disordered state the imposition of another type of symmetries for the Ising
model (with periodic boundary conditions) turns out to be beneﬁcial – translational symmetries:

                             STxi   sx,y = sx−i,y, STyi   sx,y = sx,y−i,        0≤i<L,                              (19)

where sx,y  is  a  spin  in  the  position  (x,y)  on  the L×L  lattice.   In  Ref.  [3]  we  have  shown  that




                                                              10
Figure 5:  Eﬀect of symmetries applied during the training:  variational free energy  ˆFq  as a function of the neural
network training time on lattices size L = 32 obtained when only Z2  symmetry is applied and when one combines
Z2 and Ty  symmetries.


imposing Ty symmetry implemented by the replacement,
                                           [                                          ]
                                qθ(s)→      qθ(s) +q(STy1  s) +··· +q(STyL−1s)          /L,                                  (20)

further improves training eﬃciency.  We show the eﬀect of this improvement in Fig. 5 where the
Ty  symmetry was included during the training.  With this enhancement we reached the precision
5× 10−5 (red dots) for the system withL = 32 compared with 0.002 for HAN withZ2 (green dots)
and 0.015 given by VAN withZ2 (green dots in left panel of Fig. 4).  The numerical cost of symmetry
imposition adds up to the cost of conﬁgurations generation.  Each additional calculation of qθ(s)
which cost is given by Eq.(18) is subleading compared to the cost of conﬁgurations generation (17)
as long as the number of such additional invocations does not scale as L.  Translational symmetries
are  an  exception  here,  because  the  number  of  possible  transformations  is  given  by L  in  each  of
the dimensions.  Hence, the imposition of the Ty  symmetry as indicated by Eq. (20) introduces an
additional power of L to the cost of the symmetry imposition which would grow like∼ L3 log2L.
Adding also Tx symmetry would further change scaling into∼L4 log2L.
    As was already mentioned, both VAN and HAN approaches can be applied to not only to the
variational approximation of the free energy but also as a generator of Markov Chain Monte Carlo
propositions.  Using neural networks saved after a training consisting of 40000 epochs we generated
a Markov chain of length NMC.  As was shown in Fig. 4 this is the number of epochs after which
we observe no further improvement in the training for both algorithms and all system sizes.  The
consecutive propositions in the Markov chain

                                                      s1,..., sNMC,                                                             (21)

were accepted with probability                      (                     )
                                              min     1,p(sk+1)qθ(sk)p(sk)qθ(sk+1).                                                    (22)


                                                             11
This procedure guarantees that spin conﬁgurations are distributed according top distribution when
NMC→∞.  When qθ⁄=p some propositions are rejected, leading to repetition of conﬁgurations in
MCMC and nonzero autocorrelation.  In order to quantify them we deﬁne the normalized autocor-
relation function for any observableO (with mean  ¯O and variance varO) as
                                                 1    NMC∑  (O(si)−  ¯O)(O(si+t)−  ¯O),                             (23)
                            ΓO(t) =     1varO  NMC
                                                       i=1
and the integrated autocorrelation time

                                                               tmax∑
                                               τintO   = 1 + 2      ΓO(t).                                                     (24)
                                                               i=1
The  sum  is  performed  up  to  the  value tmax,  where  ΓO(t)  becomes  negative  (due  to  statistical
ﬂuctuations).  In what follows we choose energyH given by Eq. (1) as the operatorO and generate
Markov chain of length NMC = 6· 105 conﬁgurations.  We use them to measure τint (note that we
skippedH subscript).  We choose β = 0.44, whereτint is maximal due to the critical slowing down
(see Ref. [3] for discussion of this phenomenon in the normal VAN approach).
    Fig. 6 compares the integrated autocorrelation time for VAN and HAN as a function of system
size L.  In both approaches we observe a rise of τint  with L.  However,  it is much faster for the
VAN  approach.   It  can  be  seen  that  HAN  for  system  128× 128  achieves  similar  autocorrelation
time as the VAN algorithm for 32× 32.  These data did not include the eﬀects of the imposition of
the translational symmetry.  Since this symmetry considerably improves the quality of the training
of the neural network, we expect that the integrated autocorrelation times may be even smaller.
However, due to the increased numerical cost of that symmetry we did not consider it here.

6.  Conclusions

    In  this  work  we  have  described  a  particular  scheme  of  generating  spin  conﬁgurations  using
autoregressive neural networks which has a better scaling property than the reference approach.
We  have  provided  estimates  of  its  numerical  cost  which  showed  that  it  scales  with  the  system
size as L3  as opposed to L6  of the VAN approach.  The main improvement comes from the fact
that  we  have  replaced  a  single  autoregressive  neural  network  of  width∼ L2  by  a  hierarchy  of
log2L− 1  neural  networks  of  decreasing  width.   It  follows  that  the  number  of  neural  networks
weights is much smaller in the new scheme, thus leading to a much smaller memory consumption.
We expect that, from the practical perspective, the improvement is even larger because it usually
takes  less  steps  of  the  training  algorithm  to  provide  optimal  results  for  a  neural  network  with
smaller number of weights.  Our idea can improve both, the variational method of estimating the
free energy of statistical systems, and the autocorrelation times in the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
simulations.  Eventually, we emphasize that the hierarchical structure of neural networks allowed
us  to  reintroduce  translational  invariance  on  the  level  of  physical  degrees  of  freedom.   Further
improvements may beneﬁt from this fact.

7.  Outlook

    The following observations may serve as possible future research directions.


                                                            12
     Figure 6:  Integrated autocorrelation time of the hierarchical algorithm as a function of the system size L.


    First, in this work we have demonstrated that the improved scaling of our proposal works well
for the two-dimensional Ising model.  However, it is possible to generalize our recursive approach
to  higher  dimensions  as  well  as  to  systems  with  more  complex  interactions.   For  example  spin
glasses  models  where  the  coupling  constant J  depends  on  the  bound  can  also  be  simulated.   In
a  straightforward  manner  the  random  values  of Jij  can  be  included  in  the  structure  of  neural
networks  on  subsequent  levels  in  the  hierarchy  as  additional  external  parameters.   In  this  way
the  conditional  dependence  on Jij  can  be  incorporated  allowing  the  neural  network  to  correctly
account for the functional dependence onJij.  One may expect that if the training of such hierarchy
of neural networks is successful,  it could be performed once and used for any set of Jij  without
the need of re-training,  in contrast to the VAN approach [6] or alternative method suggested in
Ref. [13].  Moreover, since the neural networks provide global updates, such approach might be able
to overcome the notorious problem of traditional methods of getting trapped in one of the local
minima of the free energy.  Recent results showing that ergodic sampling in a case of complicated
energy  landscape  in  the  context  of  normalizing  ﬂows  was  reported  in  Refs.  [14,  15].   Hence,  we
expect signiﬁcant improvement of the quality of results with the HAN approach applied to spin
glass type of systems.
    Second, the approach proposed in this work oﬀers an improved training strategy, as the training
of neural networks for larger spin systems does not need to be started from random weights.  Indeed,
small neural networks at the bottom of the HAN hierarchy can be trained to high accuracy using
much smaller spin systems, their states can be saved and reused for larger spin systems.  This is
due  to  the  fact  that  the  conditional  probabilities  depend  only  on  the  surrounding  spins  and  are
independent of the total size of the simulated system.  So in principle when doubling the system
linear size L, only the two largest neural networksN 0 andN 1 have to be constructed and trained
”from  scratch”.   The  rest  of  the  hierarchyNi  can  be  reused  from  the  smaller  system.   Those
networks could be used as they are, without any further training, but probably better results can


                                                             13
be achieved with some additional training which we would expect to converge faster.
    One may also expect that smaller batch sizes can be used for training.  One may observe that
the smaller neural networks at higher iterations of the division are trained using multiple sublattices
of the original conﬁguration.  In fact at iteration i, we have 4i  sublattices which we invoke in the
training process and hence the variance of the gradient is 2i smaller than in the original approach.
Hence, we expect that the quality of training of these inner neural networks will be very high.  In
the case when such precision is not necessary, one may try to reduce the batch size.
    Eventually,  the  natural  question  which  arises,  whether  the  hierarchical  generation  presented
in this work can be generalized to systems with continuous degrees of freedom.  Our preliminary
studies show that this can be done for the scalarφ4 ﬁeld theory using Normalizing Flows.  However,
using the hierarchy of neural networks with dense layers turns out to be not as beneﬁcial as we have
demonstrated in the case of autoregressive networks.  Further studies are needed for more deﬁnite
conclusions.


Acknowledgments

    Computer time allocation ’plgtmdlangevin2’ and ’plgnnformontecarlo’ on the Prometheus su-
percomputer hosted by AGH Cyfronet in Krak´ow, Poland was used through the polish PLGRID
consortium.  T.S. kindly acknowledges support of the Polish National Science Center (NCN) Grants
No. 2019/32/C/ST2/00202 and 2021/43/D/ST2/03375 and support of the Faculty of Physics, As-
tronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University Grant No. 2021-N17/MNS/000062.
This research was partially funded by the Priority Research Area Digiworld under the program Ex-
cellence Initiative – Research University at the Jagiellonian University in Krak´ow.

References

 [1]M.    S.    Albergo,    G.    Kanwar,    P.    E.    Shanahan,          Flow-based    generative    mod-
     els   for   markov   chain   monte   carlo   in   lattice   ﬁeld   theory,        Phys.   Rev.   D   100
     (2019)      034515.      URL:      https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.034515.
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.100.034515.

 [2]K. A. Nicoli, S. Nakajima, N. Strodthoﬀ, W. Samek, K.-R. M¨uller, P. Kessel,  Asymptotically
     unbiased estimation of physical observables with neural samplers,   Phys. Rev. E 101 (2020)
     023304. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.101.023304. arXiv:1910.13496.

 [3]P.  Bia las,  P.  Korcyl,  T.  Stebel,   Analysis  of  autocorrelation  times  in  Neural  Markov  Chain
     Monte Carlo simulations (2021). arXiv:2111.10189.

 [4]N.  Metropolis,  A.  W.  Rosenbluth,  M.  N.  Rosenbluth,  A.  H.  Teller,  E.  Teller,   Equation  of
     state  calculations  by  fast  computing  machines,   The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics  21  (1953)
     1087–1092. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1699114. doi:10.1063/1.1699114.

 [5]G. Kanwar, M. S. Albergo, D. Boyda, K. Cranmer, D. C. Hackett, S. Racani`ere, D. J. Rezende,
     P. E. Shanahan,  Equivariant ﬂow-based sampling for lattice gauge theory,  Phys. Rev. Lett.
     125 (2020) 121601. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.121601. arXiv:2003.06413.




                                                           14
 [6]D.  Wu,  L.  Wang,  P.  Zhang,    Solving  Statistical  Mechanics  Using  Variational  Autoregres-
     sive  Networks,    Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  122  (2019)  080602.  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.080602.
     arXiv:1809.10606.

 [7]K.    A.    Nicoli,    C.    J.    Anders,    L.    Funcke,    T.    Hartung,    K.    Jansen,    P.    Kessel,
     S.    Nakajima,    P.    Stornati,          Estimation    of    thermodynamic    observables    in    lat-
     tice   ﬁeld   theories   with   deep   generative   models,         Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   126   (2021)
     032001.           URL:            https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.032001.
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.032001.

 [8]D. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Hu, Z. Zhao, V. M. Hur, B. K. Clark,  Gauge Invariant Autoregressive
     Neural Networks for Quantum Lattice Models (2021). arXiv:2101.07243.

 [9]P.   C.   J.   M.   Hammersley,   Markov   ﬁelds   on   ﬁnite   graphs   and   lattices,   1971.   URL:
     http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk//tildelowgrg/books/hammfest/hamm-cliff.pdf.

[10]P. Cliﬀord, Markov random ﬁelds in statistics, in:  Disorder in Physical Systems. A Volume in
     Honour of John M. Hammersley, Clarendon Press, 1990.

[11]D.   P.   Kingma,   J.   Ba,   Adam:     A   method   for   stochastic   optimization,   2014.   URL:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980.

[12]A.   E.   Ferdinand,    M.   E.   Fisher,        Bounded   and   inhomogeneous   ising   models.   i.
     speciﬁc-heat   anomaly   of   a   ﬁnite   lattice,        Phys.   Rev.   185   (1969)   832–846.   URL:
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.185.832. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.185.832.
[13]B.  McNaughton,  M.  V.  Miloˇsevi´c,  A.  Perali,  S.  Pilati,   Boosting  Monte  Carlo  simulations
     of  spin  glasses  using  autoregressive  neural  networks,    Phys.  Rev.  E  101  (2020)  053312.
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.101.053312. arXiv:2002.04292.

[14]D. C. Hackett, C.-C. Hsieh, M. S. Albergo, D. Boyda, J.-W. Chen, K.-F. Chen, K. Cranmer,
     G. Kanwar, P. E. Shanahan,  Flow-based sampling for multimodal distributions in lattice ﬁeld
     theory (2021). arXiv:2107.00734.

[15]M. S. Albergo, D. Boyda, K. Cranmer, D. C. Hackett, G. Kanwar, S. Racani`ere, D. J. Rezende,
     F. Romero-L´opez, P. E. Shanahan, J. M. Urban, Flow-based sampling in the lattice Schwinger
     model at criticality (2022). arXiv:2202.11712.

















                                                            15