Towards the ground state of molecules via diﬀusion Monte Carlo on neural networks
Weiluo Ren,1,∗ Weizhong Fu,1, 2,† Xiaojie Wu, 1 and Ji Chen 2, 3,‡
1ByteDance Research, Zhonghang Plaza, No. 43, North 3rd Ring West Road,
Haidian District, Beijing, People’s Republic of China
2School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China
3Interdisciplinary Institute of Light-Element Quantum Materials,
Frontiers Science Center for Nano-Optoelectronics,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China
(Dated: April 11, 2023)
Diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC) based on ﬁxed-node approximation has enjoyed signiﬁcant devel-
opments in the past decades and become one of the go-to methods when accurate ground state
energy of molecules and materials is needed. However, the inaccurate nodal structure hinders the
application of DMC for more challenging electronic correlation problems. In this work, we apply the
neural-network based trial wavefunction in ﬁxed-node DMC, which allows accurate calculations of
a broad range of atomic and molecular systems of diﬀerent electronic characteristics. Our method
is superior in both accuracy and eﬃciency compared to state-of-the-art neural network methods
using variational Monte Carlo (VMC). We also introduce an extrapolation scheme based on the
empirical linearity between VMC and DMC energies, and signiﬁcantly improve our binding energy
calculation. Overall, this computational framework provides a benchmark for accurate solutions of
correlated electronic wavefunction and also sheds light on the chemical understanding of molecules.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the establishment of quantum wavefunction the-
ory by Erwin Schr¨ odinger,ab initio electronic structure
calculation has become one of the holy grails in chem-
istry [1, 2]. Molecules generally consist of a set of nuclei
bonded together via electrons through electrostatic in-
teractions. Therefore, the ground state electronic struc-
ture, i.e. the many body electronic wavefunction, is very
much the most fundamental property, based on which
we form the basic understanding of molecules. On top of
the ground state wavefunction solution, one may further
study electronic excitation, calculate nuclear forces and
vibrations, optimize molecular structures, model dynam-
ics and reactions, etc. [3]. Approximated methods, such
as density functional theory and post Hartree-Fock meth-
ods have been widely employed for these purposes, but
challenges still exist when high accuracy is needed [4, 5].
For instance, the sub-chemical-accuracy is often desired
to predict adsorption of molecules on surfaces, the pack-
ing order of organic chemicals, and the hydrogen bond-
ing of water and biological molecules [6, 7]. Therefore,
pushing the limit towards the exact ground state wave-
function of molecules is of both fundamental importance
and practical relevance.
Stochastic approaches, i.e. quantum Monte Carlo
(QMC) methods, have been a competitive rival of the de-
terministic methods in chasing the ground truth of many
body electronic wavefunction of molecules [8–11]. In par-
ticular, diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC), an approach based
∗ renweiluo@bytedance.com
† W.R. and W.F. contributed equally to this work.
‡ ji.chen@pku.edu.cn
on ground state projection, is capable of treating dy-
namic correlations and reaching sub-chemical-accuracy
for molecules [12, 13]. However, eﬀective DMC algo-
rithms usually work together with the so-called ﬁxed-
node approximation [14, 15], and the accuracy is only
assured when a good trial wavefunction containing the
correct nodal structure is provided in advance [16]. De-
spite many progresses have been made to improve the
trial wavefunction, e.g. using physically more meaningful
ansatz or combined with multi-determinant post Hartree-
Fock wavefunctions [13, 17, 18], the ﬁxed-node approxi-
mation remains as the Achilles’ heel of DMC.
Recently, it has been shown that machine learning
techniques such as neural networks can lend strong sup-
port to describe the electronic structure of molecular sys-
tems and provide a powerful way to reconstruct the many
body wavefunction [19–26]. FermiNet is one of the no-
table examples, which has already shown promising re-
sults for small molecules consisting of typically less than
30 electrons [20, 21, 27]. In these neural network wave-
function methods, variational Monte Carlo (VMC) is of-
ten employed to train the network on the ﬂy. Despite its
eﬀectiveness on small molecules, it remains to be chal-
lenging to apply neural-network based VMC on larger
systems, due to required large computation resources and
long converging time.
In this work, we integrate the FermiNet neural network
wavefunction into DMC. This approach takes advantage
of the accurate trial wavefunction of FermiNet and the
eﬃcient ground state projection of DMC, which allows
calculations of a range of systems to unprecedented ac-
curacy. We refer to the vanilla FermiNet approach as
FermiNet-VMC, and refer to our FermiNet-based DMC
approach as FermiNet-DMC. Compared to FermiNet-
VMC, FermiNet-DMC is able to achieve lower variational
ground state energy at reduced computational cost. We
arXiv:2204.13903v2  [physics.chem-ph]  10 Apr 2023
2
carry out tests on atoms as well as molecules including
N2, cyclobutadiene, water dimer, benzene and benzene
dimer. We also present the empirical linear relation be-
tween VMC and DMC energies in our calculations and
introduce an extrapolation scheme accordingly. Insights
to the electronic structure of these systems obtained from
our calculations are also discussed.
II. RESULTS
A. Computational framework
As illustrated in Fig. 1a, in the traditional elec-
tronic structure approach, diﬀusion Monte Carlo is of-
ten used after optimization of trial wavefunction using
VMC, which approaches the limit of a given wavefunction
ansatz. DMC further puriﬁes the true ground state out of
other contaminating eigenstates, and it often allows the
breaking through of the ansatz limit. However, to over-
come the notorious sign problem, nodal points where the
wavefunction is zero have to be ﬁxed in DMC, and walk-
ers are only allowed to evolve in each ﬁxed nodal pocket.
Here, the idea is to implement the recently developed
neural network as an accurate wavefunction ansatz (Fig.
1b). On one hand, the wavefunction learned by the neu-
ral network automatically reproduces an accurate repre-
sentation of the mysterious nodal structure of many elec-
trons of molecules. The accurate nodal structure ensures
that the subsequent DMC simulation with ﬁxed nodes
does not yield bias to the ground state. On the other
hand, compared with neural networks based VMC, our
scheme only requires the information of the nodal struc-
ture instead of the full wavefunction. It is reasonable to
expect the nodal structure to be simpler characterized
than the full wavefunction.
Our multi-walker DMC algorithm is implemented in a
fully parallel manner, in which each walker independently
simulates the stochastic dynamics of electrons (Fig. 1c).
The three key steps in our DMC algorithm are diﬀusion,
branching, and merging (Fig. 1d), and they ensure that
the equilibrium is reached for each walker after simula-
tion in terms of the probability distribution of diﬀerent
electronic conﬁgurations. The diﬀusion step changes the
conﬁguration of electrons from one to another, while the
cross-node movement is forbidden. Branching and merg-
ing control the total population of walkers during the
simulation. In this work, we have implemented a GPU
and neural network friendly DMC algorithm, which can
be easily scaled out to multiple computing nodes. The
runtime for one step in FermiNet-DMC is almost identi-
cal to that in FermiNet-VMC. Therefore, to compare the
eﬃciency or total runtime between FermiNet-DMC and
FermiNet-VMC, we only need to compare the number of
steps in those processes. More methodological and tech-
nical details are provided in the Method section and the
Supplementary Note 1-5.
B. Single atoms
Neural network models are faced with the trade-oﬀ
between model expressiveness and computational inten-
siveness. For powerful models like FermiNet, it may take
hundreds of thousands iterations to converge in the train-
ing process even for small benchmark systems with just a
few electrons. Fig. 2 shows calculations for single atoms
with a shallow and narrow FermiNet ansatz with only
2 layers of rather small number of neurons (see Supple-
mentary Table S3 for details). The network is designed
to be restricted so that we can study FermiNet’s perfor-
mance when it is not expressive enough for the considered
systems. This situation is of practical importance espe-
cially when we are interested in applying neural network
based QMC methods to large systems of one hundred
electrons or more. As shown in Fig. 2a, a common pat-
tern of FermiNet’s training progress is that the energy
curve drops to a fairly low level in a short amount of
time and then slowly converges to its limit. Fig. 2a is
a calculation on the Be atom with the mentioned small
network, and after 5×105 steps of training which ensures
complete convergence, the systematic error still can not
be reduced to within the chemical accuracy. In addi-
tion, the computational cost could scale up quickly for
larger systems even on the most advanced modern com-
putation platforms such as NVIDIA’s Tesla A100 GPU.
This issue prevents accurate calculations for more than
30 correlated electrons [20, 21].
The combination of the FermiNet neural network wave-
function ansatz and DMC achieves a substantial improve-
ment in both accuracy and eﬃciency. For Be atom and
the same simple neural network, FermiNet-DMC energy
drops to within 1 mHa with respect to the reference value
of the total energy. The DMC data is obtained with 10 5
steps of simulation, and the variance of DMC is also sig-
niﬁcantly reduced. It is also encouraging to see that even
when we start from the trial wavefunction after 104 steps
of training, the DMC energy obtained subsequently is
also converged within 1 mHa to the exact value. At the
105 step when the training has not yet completely con-
verged, the DMC energy is already consistent with the
result obtained at the 5 × 105 step. The good perfor-
mance of DMC based on undertrained trial wavefunctions
suggests the nodal structure is well characterized before
the wavefunction is fully trained in the neural network
ansatz. In Fig. 2b-d, we present the three-dimensional
cuts of the full 11-dimensional (11D) nodal structure of
the FermiNet wavefunction at the initial, 10 4, and 10 5
step. The 10 5 step nodal structure is very well converged
to the correct one obtained from CI calculations [30], and
the nodal structure at 104 step is also qualitatively same,
explaining the high accuracy obtained subsequently us-
ing DMC. For comparison, the nodal structure of the
initial wavefunction is also shown. Because of the fact
that only the nodal structure determines the accuracy of
DMC, the training process of neural network functions
can be signiﬁcantly shortened. Overall, to reach chemi-
3
Nucleus-electron Interaction
Electron-electron Interaction
Ψ(r ; R)
Fix Nodes
Nproc
Nsteps
Optimization
Projection
DMC
VMC
Ground Truth
Ansatz Limit
Eigenstates
Branch
Merge
Diffuse
Fully
Parallelizable
Stochastic Dynamics 
of Electrons
a d
c
b
GPU
FIG. 1. Computational framework. a , A sketch of a brief overview on variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and diﬀusion
Monte Carlo (DMC) from the perspective of eigenstates composition. Atomic orbitals represent diﬀerent eigenstates, and
histograms indicate the weight of each eigenstate in the state decomposition. Top: A randomly initialized state with no
dominant eigenstate. Middle: The output state of VMC where the ground state dominates, but other eigenstates are still
non-negligible due to ansatz limitations. Bottom: The output state of DMC, which surpasses ansatz limitations and reaches
the ground state. b, Left: a neural network ansatz of wavefunction; right: one dimensional projection of a many electron
wavefunction and its nodal surface. c, Left: parallelized diﬀusion Monte Carlo processes on GPU; right: zoom in to the
stochastic dynamics of each walker containing conﬁgurations of all electrons in the system, while the nodal structure is ﬁxed.
This panel is inspired by and adapted with permission from the website of Quantum Monte Carlo for Chemistry @ Toulouse
(http://qmcchem.ups-tlse.fr/index.php/Quantum_Monte_Carlo_for_Chemistry_@_Toulouse) [28]. d, Three key steps in
diﬀusion Monte Carlo. Each walker is assigned with a weight which evolves every iteration. Diﬀuse: The stochastic propagation
of walkers without crossing the nodal surface. Branch: Split one walker when its weight becomes too large. Merge: Merge two
walkers when their weights become too small.
cal accuracy for Be atom, the cost of FermiNet-DMC is
only a fraction of the cost of FermiNet-VMC.
Fig. 2e further shows the energy of FermiNet-based
VMC and DMC for diﬀerent atoms in order of the num-
ber of electrons under the same 2-layer network. We try
diﬀerent learning rates and train enough iterations (10 6
for S, Cl, Ar and 5 × 105 for the other atoms) to en-
sure that we make full use of the expressive power of the
network. As expected the error of VMC increases when
the number of electrons in the system increases and the
complexity of the system gradually exceeds the expres-
sive limits of the neural network. With DMC the errors
are reduced by more than half. The dashed lines are
linear ﬁttings of the VMC and DMC energy. And the
deviation of the data points from the ﬁtting curves indi-
cates that there is a correlation between the DMC and
the VMC energy: when the VMC energy is comparably
better, the DMC error is also smaller. The linear rising
of DMC error shows that the training of nodal structure
also becomes increasingly diﬃcult when system size in-
creases, and the correlation between the VMC and the
DMC error indicates the information of the nodal struc-
ture is closely entangled with the full wavefunction. Note
that we use a 2-layer network here in order to examine
the behavior of FermiNet VMC and DMC in the regime
where the network ansatz is relatively restricted for the
considered systems, while FermiNet-VMC can be more
expressive to achieve high accuracy for those atoms with
more layers and neurons, as shown in [20].
Moreover, the improvement of DMC suggests that it
may take a smaller and hence more eﬃcient network to
represent the nodal surface, without aﬀecting the DMC
accuracy. In Fig. 2f, we present a set of such tests on
Ne atom, where the complexity of the neural network is
labeled as (L,D,W) to indicate the number of layers, the
number of determinants, and the width of each layer in
the network, respectively. Overall, when the expressive-
ness of the network is reduced both VMC and DMC are
aﬀected in terms of their accuracy. Therefore, all the
calculations suggest that the VMC energy is a good indi-
4
f
L2D1
W(32,4)
L3D1
W(32,4)
L4D1
W(32,4)
L4D16
W(32,4)
L4D1
W(256,32)
L4D16
W(256,32)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0Energy-Eexact(mEh)
FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC
e
0 1 2 3 4 5
VMC training steps ×10
5
0
1
2
3
4
5Energy-Eexact(mEh)
FermiNet-VMC
EVMC
converge
FermiNet-DMC
Initial
a b dc
105 steps104 steps
Li Be B C N O F Ne Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70Energy-Eexact(mEh)
FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC
θ
1  - θ
2
r1  - r
2
r3 - r
4
0
0
1
-1
-1
1
0
1
θ
1  - θ
2
r1  - r
2
r3 - r
4
0
0
1
-1
-1
1
0
1
θ
1  - θ
2
r1  - r
2
r3 - r
4
0
0
1
-1
-1
1
0
1
FIG. 2. Accuracy and eﬃciency of FermiNet-DMC on single atoms. a , The blue line shows the energy of a 2-layer
FermiNet as a function of training iteration for a Be atom. The orange symbols show the DMC energy obtained with the trial
wavefunction at the 104th, 105th and 5×105th training iteration, respectively. The red dashed line shows the ﬁnal convergence
of VMC energy. b-d, The three isosurfaces show the three-dimensional cuts of the full 11D nodal structure obtained at diﬀerent
training iterations (See Methods, section Nodal structure and wavefunction visualization for plotting details). e, The calculated
energies of atoms with respect to the reference ground state energy as the number of electrons increases with a 2-layer network.
The dashed lines are linear ﬁttings on the second and the third period elements, respectively. f, The energy error with diﬀerent
settings of FermiNet for a Ne atom. Three variables are respectively the number of layers (L), the number of determinants (D)
and the width (W) of each layer. All the energy reference values are from Chakravorty et al. (1993)[29].
cator of not only how well the wavefunction is optimized
but also the quality of its nodal structure. The behavior
is also expected for other neural network wavefunction
ansatz. Combined with the typical ﬁrst-steep-then-ﬂat
optimization curve in neural networks, we can automate
the switching-on of DMC and minimize the total cost of
calculations at targeted accuracy.
Building upon the successful treatments of FermiNet-
DMC on atoms, we now extend the approach to larger
molecules.
C. Nitrogen molecule
The ﬁrst example is the dissociation curve of N 2
molecule. At equilibrium N 2 forms a strong triple co-
valent bond at 2.1 a.u., and the dissociation is accompa-
nied by a severe bond breaking process, which is strongly
correlated in nature. Therefore, the dissociation curve of
N2 is often used to benchmark electronic structure meth-
ods’ description of strong correlation. In DMC, this is
also highly relevant because the nodal structure is di-
rectly aﬀected by electron correlation. Fig. 3a plots the
relative energy of N 2 with respect to the experimental
reference [31] as a function of the bond length. The re-
sults from FermiNet-VMC and r12-MR-ACPF, a state-
of-the-art traditional multi-reference approach [32], are
also shown. We can see that our DMC calculations are
consistently better than those references, with an error
of less than 1 mHa in a wide range of bond length. The
largest error comes, not surprisingly, around the dissocia-
tion point near 4 a.u., and yet the error is only 3 mHa. In
fact, our results can be considered as the most accurate
ab initio one of N 2 dissociation curve reported so far. It
is worth noting that the FermiNet-VMC results here have
been remarkably accurate, whose deviation from experi-
ment curve is within 2 mHa near equilibrium and 4 mHa
in dissociation region. Yet our FermiNet-DMC results
can improve averagely about 1 mHa. For comparison,
CCSD(T) calculation (not plotted), which is known as
the “golden standard” in quantum chemistry, have an er-
ror of 25 mHa around 4 a.u. [20]. In terms of relative en-
ergy, the non-parallelity error (NPE) of FermiNet-DMC
(3.28 mHa) is only slightly better than that of FermiNet-
VMC (3.53 mHa), consistent with mild improvement on
small systems reported in [37], and both are comparable
to the state-of-the-art r12-MR-ACPF result (2.14 mHa).
The remaining error source of DMC is the nodal struc-
ture error produced in the training of neural network us-
ing VMC, which is fully reﬂected on the shape of the Fer-
5
2 3 4 5 6
Bond length (a0)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Energy - EExpt (mEh)
2 3 4 5 6
−109.4
−109.2Energy (Eh)
FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC
r12-MR-ACPF
Experiment
Dissociation region
SP3 SP4 SP5 Overall (SP2~SP10)
0
1
2
3
4
5Energy-ESP1 (mEh)
undertrained FermiNet-VMC
well-trained FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC with undertrained FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC with well-trained FermiNet-VMC
DMC (others' work)
CCSD(T)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Mean absolute deviation (mEh)
ba
d
ESP3
ESP1
c
MAD
FIG. 3. Calculations on N2, cyclobutadiene and water dimer. a , Main panel: calculated energy of N 2 at diﬀerent bond
length, plotted as the diﬀerence to the experimental data [31]. For comparison, the green line is the highly accurate r12-MR-
ACPF results under a modiﬁed basis set based on aug-cc-pV5Z [32]. Inset: the dissociation curves from experimental data (black
line) and FermiNet-DMC (orange squares). The negligible error bars (less than 0.1 mHa) are not plotted. The pink backgrounds
highlight the dissociation region where correlations are strong. b, Molecular structures of cyclobutadiene’s equilibrium state
(bottom) and transition state (top). c, Main panel: the ground state energy of cyclobutadiene’s equilibrium state as a function
of the VMC training step. FermiNet-DMC energy is calculated using the trial wavefunction at the corresponding training steps.
FermiNet-VMC∗ indicates the result from Spencer et al. [21]. Inset: the transition barrier of cyclobutadiene calculated with
diﬀerent methods. Pink background indicates the range of experimental estimates between 2.5 and 15.9 mHa, while we show only
the part above 9 mHa to highlight diﬀerences between QMC results. Grey dashed lines indicate results from ﬁve multi-reference
coupled cluster (MRCC) methods (top to bottom): MR-DI-EOMCCSD, RMRCCSD(T), Mk-MRCCSD(T), MRCISD+Q and
BW-MRCCSD(T) [33]. d, Left: three of the relative energies of the 10 Smith stationary points SP n (n = 1, 2,..., 10)[34]. For
the other results, see Supplementary Fig. 6. The SP1 structure is the global minimum and is taken as the reference. The
geometries of SP1 and SP3 are shown as insets while the others are included in Supplementary Fig. 4. Two neural networks
have been trained for 10 5 steps and 3× 105 steps, which are dubbed as “undertrained” and “well-trained”. All the geometries
are optimized by CCSD(T) [35]. The CCSD(T) energies and the DMC results with the conventional Slater-Jastrow ansatz [36]
are also plotted for comparison. The error bar of the energy diﬀerence is calculated as the square root of the sum of the squares
of each energy estimator’s standard error. Right: mean absolute deviation from CCSD(T) results over all the relative energies.
miNet VMC and DMC curves. The results of FermiNet-
DMC are close to the experimental ﬁtting curve within
1 mHa outside the dissociation region and cannot go any
lower due to the variational property. So, when combined
with a more expressive or better trained neural network
that can handle the dissociation region, it is very likely
that the full dissociation curve of N 2 can be reproduced
by DMC within an error of 1 mHa, meaning that DMC
can also solve strongly correlated systems within chemi-
cal accuracy.
D. Cyclobutadiene
A similar example is the structural transition of cy-
clobutadiene, which is also well known for its multi-
referential nature. The neural network based VMC mod-
els [21, 22] have already shown promising results on cy-
clobutadiene. FermiNet-DMC can handle this system
with higher accuracy and reduced computational cost.
In our experiments, VMC process takes around 3×105
6
steps to converge, though the converged result is still
around 7 mHa higher than the reported value in ref.
[21], which converges in 2 × 105 steps. This is proba-
bly because we use diﬀerent training hyperparamters, or
simply because our optimization process gets trapped in
a bad local minimum. However, our ﬁnal DMC result is
around 4 mHa lower than the reference data [21]. This
demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of our DMC implementa-
tion as a seamless extension to VMC. Namely even if the
optimization in VMC does not work well, the following
DMC process can still bring the energy calculation to a
highly accurate level. This is especially important for
neural-network based VMC, because its optimization is
signiﬁcantly trickier to tune and requires a longer time
to completely converge, compared to conventional VMC.
Here the DMC ﬁnite time step error is negligible as il-
lustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1, which guarantees the
variational property of our FermiNet-DMC results,
With 105 VMC and 105 DMC steps, FermiNet-DMC’s
energy result is 2 mHa lower than the reference data in
ref. [21] produced from a training phase with 2×105 VMC
steps. Note that in this case our number of total QMC
steps is still slightly less than the ref. [21] due to the
required inference phase in FermiNet-VMC. Therefore,
FermiNet-DMC should be preferred for its lower varia-
tional energy at the same or less computational cost.
The automerization energy diﬀerence of cyclobutadi-
ene is shown in the inset panel of Fig. 3c. Neural-network
based VMC gives an accurate automerization energy dif-
ference of cyclobutadiene [21, 22]. It is consistent with
the high-end of the experimental data. The results of
FermiNet-DMC are also in the same region. See Supple-
mentary Note 9 for more details, including the training
curve for transition conﬁguration and the DMC energy
data for both equilibrium and transition conﬁgurations.
E. Water dimer
In addition to the strong covalent bonding, where
static correlation is more essential, molecular systems
with weaker hydrogen bonding and non-covalent interac-
tions can also be challenging because of dynamic corre-
lations. To this end, we have carried out FermiNet-DMC
calculations on the 10 Smith stationary point of water
dimer [34]. The 10 structures, as illustrated in Fig. 3d
and Supplementary Fig. 4, have diﬀerent hydrogen bond-
ing conﬁgurations and their relative energies are used to
benchmark the performance of electronic structure meth-
ods and force ﬁeld models on hydrogen bonding systems
[38]. With 10 total energy results (plotted in Supple-
mentary Fig. 5) and 9 relative energy results (plotted in
Supplementary Fig. 6), we can thus have a rather cred-
ible investigation on the error cancellation performance
of FermiNet-VMC and FermiNet-DMC. We compare the
energy results of FermiNet-DMC with an undertrained
network and a well-trained network as trial wavefunc-
tions respectively. The undertrained network is trained
by VMC in 10 5 steps, while the well-trained network is
trained by VMC in 3× 105 steps. CCSD(T) results [35]
are displayed as benchmarks for their high accuracy for
such type of systems.
As shown in Fig. 3d, the undertrained FermiNet-
VMC performs badly on SP3 and SP5, and so does
the well-trained FermiNet-VMC on SP4, though some of
the FermiNet-VMC results are quite close to the bench-
mark results (e.g. SP7 and SP8 in Supplementary Fig.
6). On the other hand, FermiNet-DMC performs con-
sistently well no matter which network is used as trial
wavefunction, undertrained or well-trained. Overall, the
mean absolute deviations from the benchmark CCSD(T)
results are also given in Fig. 3d, from which we can
clearly tell the improvement of FermiNet-DMC on rela-
tive energy calculations. For comparison purpose, we also
show DMC results with traditional Slater-Jastrow wave-
function ansatz [36], whose accuracy is at the same level
with FermiNet-DMC as the diﬀerence is negligible com-
pared to the statistical error. The inferior performance
of FermiNet-VMC may be due to the diﬀerent degree of
convergence in diﬀerent systems, while FermiNet-DMC
provides a more eﬃcient and practical solution than fully
converged FermiNet-VMC.
F. Benzene
To further illustrate the power of our approach, we
have examined the benzene molecule and a benzene
dimer. Benzene is one of the most fundamental organic
molecules with a hexagonal ring of C-H (Fig. 4a). There
have been challenges in understanding its electronic con-
ﬁguration, bonding order and obtaining the ground state
energy. To understand the electronic structure of ben-
zene molecule, we performed FermiNet based VMC and
DMC simulations with 3-layer and 4-layer networks sep-
arately. Our best FermiNet-DMC result calculated with
the 4-layer network coincides with the CCSD(T) result
extrapolated to complete-basis-set (CBS) limit. The
comparison is shown in Fig. 4d. The CCSD(T) result is
carried out with Psi4 [39] and the CBS result is extrap-
olated using cc-pCVXZ (X=3,4,5) basis, which is much
larger than the ones reported in [40] and used by oth-
ers as the state-of-the-art electronic structure methods
in Refs. [41]. The energy from our CCSD(T) / CBS
calculation is also much lower than those references. See
Supplementary Note 14 for more details on the CCSD(T)
calculation and CBS extrapolation.
The 3-layer FermiNet here is much smaller than the
4-layer one. Besides being one layer shallower, the num-
ber of neurons on each layer is also signiﬁcantly less. See
Supplementary Tables 8-10 for the related hyperparam-
eters. Fig. 4d shows that the 3-layer FermiNet-DMC’s
energy is lower than the 4-layer VMC result by around
10 mHa, which demonstrates one of the main beneﬁts of
FermiNet-DMC that it can achieve better accuracy with
smaller network. This is especially important when we
7
are dealing with large systems.
In our calculations, FermiNet-DMC is able to achieve
lower variational energy results with an order of magni-
tude better eﬃciency. With a total of 4×105 QMC steps
(2×105 VMC training steps and 2×105 DMC steps), the
3-layer FermiNet-DMC’s energy result (-232.225 Ha) is
slightly better than the 4-layer FermiNet-VMC’s energy
result (-232.223 Ha) at 10 6 VMC training step. More-
over, the runtime of a single VMC step for the 4-layer
network is approximately 4 times that of a single VMC
or DMC step for the 3-layer network under the same
computation resources. Therefore, in this case, the 3-
layer FermiNet-DMC can achieve a better energy result
at only a tenth of the total computation cost compared to
the 4-layer FermiNet-VMC. Similarly, compared to the
3-layer FermiNet-VMC at 2 × 106 VMC training step,
the 3-layer FermiNet-DMC with 4× 105 QMC steps can
achieve more than 10 mHa better energy result at only a
ﬁfth of the total computation cost.
Furthermore, the energy diﬀerence between the
FermiNet-DMC results in Fig. 4d is only around 3 to
4 mHa, suggesting the closeness between the node struc-
ture of the two trial wavefunctions. To conﬁrm this state-
ment, we visualized 2-dimensional slices of those trial
wavefunctions in Fig. 4b-c. The slices are generated by
moving a single spin-up electron inside a two dimensional
box while ﬁxing all other electrons at representative po-
sitions suggested by Liu et al. [42] and illustrated in Fig.
4a. See Section IV E and Supplementary Note 11 for
more visualization details. Comparing Fig. 4b (4-layer
FermiNet VMC) and Fig. 4c (3-layer FermiNet), we ﬁnd
that the nodes, represented by the dark pixels, do share
the same pattern. Moreover, the parts of nodal surface
in lighter areas, namely with larger wavefunction value,
are very close to each other in Fig. 4b-c, and they are
the most important parts of nodal surface in the DMC
process since walkers are more likely to visit its neigh-
bourhood. The closeness of those parts is consistent with
the fact that the FermiNet-DMC energies are close.
To track how nodal surface evolves along the training
process, we propose a divergence D(S,T ) measuring the
diﬀerence between two nodal surfaces S andT . The def-
inition and algorithmic details are described in section
IV F and Supplementary Note 15, and the deﬁnition is
also related to the intuition mentioned above that nodes
in the neighbourhood with larger wavefunction value are
more important in the QMC calculation. For the 3-layer
FermiNet, we calculated
D(Sﬁnal,Sk),
where Sﬁnal and Sk are the nodal surface correspond-
ing to the ﬁnal VMC training step and the intermediate
training stepsk, respectively. The result is shown in Fig.
4e together with the VMC and DMC energy, where the
trend of the divergence correlates well with energies. As
a matter of fact, there is a linear relation between the
divergence and DMC energy, as shown in Fig. 4f, indi-
cating that the proposed divergence successfully captures
the essential information of the diﬀerence between nodal
surfaces. Here the divergence converges to around 0.005
instead of 0 because of the large learning rate used when
training the 3-layer FermiNet for benzene.
We have also trained a neural network for a benzene
dimer, which is a prototypical system to further test non-
covalent interactions. Benzene dimer, which has 84 elec-
trons in total, is a much larger system than the ones
considered in previous neural-network based VMC works
[19–26]. We elaborate the challenges and tricks dealing
with large systems using FermiNet based QMC methods
in Supplementary Note 5. We consider a T-shaped struc-
ture with an edge-to-face arrangement, as illustrated in
Fig. 5a, speciﬁcally the equilibrium conﬁguration with
a center-to-center distance of 4.95 ˚A [43]. Fig. 5a also
shows the VMC and DMC energies as functions of the
VMC training step, which are both over 200 mHa lower
than the CCSD(T) result with cc-pCVTZ basis. The
converged FermiNet-DMC energy is over 50 mHa lower
than both FermiNet-VMC result and the CCSD(T) re-
sult with cc-pCVQZ basis. It echos statements made in
above sections that FermiNet-DMC can achieve signiﬁ-
cantly higher accuracy for larger systems or cases where
the neural network ansatz is not powerful enough to char-
acterize the ground state wavefunction well. For com-
parison, the FermiNet-VMC energy has not fully con-
verged even after four million training steps. Sch¨ atzle et
al. [44] shows that neural-network based VMC, in par-
ticular, PauliNet, can achieve variational energies at the
ﬁxed-node limit in certain circumstances, while in our
calculations, one can clearly see that it is not the case for
FermiNet especially when its expressive power is limited
compared to the size of the system. On the other hand,
our DMC result is 15 mHa higher than the CCSD(T)
/ CBS result. Note that CCSD(T) is not a variational
method, hence the relatively lower CCSD(T) / CBS re-
sult may indicate similar accuracy compared to our DMC
result. To achieve more accurate FermiNet-DMC result,
we can use a better neural-network trial wavefunction
with a larger network or a better network architecture.
In addition to the total energy at the equilibrium con-
ﬁguration, binding energy is also of great interest when
studying a benzene dimer [43, 45, 47–49], and classical
methods, such as CCSD(T) and MP2, can produce re-
sults agreeing with experimental data well. However, for
neural-network based QMC, the binding energy calcula-
tion is more subtle and challenging due to the lack of
systematic error cancellation. Using the same network
structure handling both monomer and dimer would intro-
duce additional size-inconsistency-like bias because of the
more severe expressiveness limitation on benzene dimer
than monomer. For the benzene dimer, we ﬁnd such an
estimate would predict a severe underbinding with both
VMC and DMC. Another way to estimate the binding en-
ergy is to take the diﬀerence between a separated dimer
conﬁguration (10 ˚A) [45] and the equilibrium conﬁgura-
tion, shown in Fig. 5b, which turns out to be system-
atically overbinding. With an empirical linear relation
8
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4
Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4
Y (a.u.)
VMC DMC CCSD(T)
/ CBS
−232.24
−232.23
−232.22
−232.21Energy (Eh)
L3
L4
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
VMC training steps ×106
−232.23
−232.22
−232.21
−232.20
−232.19Energy (Eh)
FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC
Node diff to final state
5 6 7
Node diff to final state ×10−3
0
5
10EDMC − Efinal (mEh)
45
50
55
log(|Ψ|)
205
210
215
log(|Ψ|)
4
5
6
7
8
Node diff ×10−3
a b c
d e f
FIG. 4. Calculations on benzene. a , Atomic structure of the benzene molecule and representative electron positions [42].
Small balls represent electrons, with spin indicated by their colors, and larger balls represent nuclei. The electron pointed by
the blue arrow is an arbitrarily chosen one for nodal set visualization in b and c. Rods are drawn to connect the nucleus with
electrons nearby. b and c, The log-scaled magnitude of unnormalized FermiNet wavefunctions for a benzene molecule. Each
slice is generated by moving a single spin-up electron in the square [−5 a.u., 5 a.u.]2 on X-Y plane while ﬁxing all other electrons
in the representative positions shown in a. The dark curves are the nodes and the orange points are the ﬁxed spin-up electrons
projected onto X-Y plane. The moving electron for b and c corresponds to the one pointed by the blue arrow on the bottom
C-H bond in a. b shows a slice for a 4-layer FermiNet while c is for a 3-layer FermiNet. d, Ground state energy of benzene
molecule. “L3” and “L4” stand for neural networks with 3 and 4 layers, respectively. The CCSD(T) result coincides with our
best DMC result with the 4-layer network. e, the trend of node diﬀerence to ﬁnal state in the training process together with
the ones for VMC and DMC energy for a benzene molecule using a 3-layer FermiNet. f, the linear trend between the node
diﬀerence and the DMC energy diﬀerence to ﬁnal state. The points correspond to diﬀerent intermediate training steps and the
dashed line is ﬁtted using least square.
between VMC and DMC energy in the training process,
we developed a simple VMC-DMC hybrid extrapolation
scheme, which leads to an accurate estimate of the bind-
ing energy, well-agreed with the experimental measure-
ments [46], also displayed in Fig. 5b. We will elaborate
more on this extrapolation scheme in Section II G. In
order to systematically improve the binding energy cal-
culation, the most straightforward way is to adopt better
neural-network ansatz as the trial wavefunction for bet-
ter accuracy. Adding regularization mechanism in the
optimization processes is another possible option so that
the model variance can be reduced for better error can-
cellation. Note that in the case of DMC with pseudopo-
tential, binding energy calculation can be also improved
with certain deterministic approximation [50]. We will
leave it as a future study apply those ideas to improve
the binding energy calculation.
G. Linear relation between VMC-DMC energy
Quite consistently, we ﬁnd linear relation between
VMC and DMC energies in our calculation. We have
encountered two types of linear relation. One is about
intermediate energies calculated along the training pro-
cess for a given system, while another one is about the
converged energies from diﬀerent systems. We take ad-
vantage of the ﬁrst type of linearity and develop a simple
but eﬀective extrapolation scheme accordingly.
We ﬁnd that, for molecular systems, such as cyclobu-
tadiene, benzene monomer and dimers, there’s a linear
trend between the VMC and DMC energies calculated at
diﬀerent steps along the VMC training process. Equiva-
lently, there’s a linear relation between quantities
E(k)
DMC−Eﬁnal v.s. E(k)
VMC−E(k)
DMC
where E(k)
VMC and E(k)
DMC represent the VMC and DMC
energy calculated at VMC training step k, and Eﬁnal is
9
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
VMC training steps ×106
−464.45
−464.40
−464.35
−464.30
−464.25Energy (Eh)
FermiNet-DMC
FermiNet-VMC
CCSD(T) / cc-pCVTZ
CCSD(T) / cc-pCVQZ
CCSD(T) / CBS*
VMC DMC Extrapolated
Mode
0
5
10
15
20ΔE  (mEh)
Experiment
extrapolated estimate
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
EVMC − EDMC (mEh)
0
5
10
15
20
25
EDMC − Efinal (mEh)
cyclobutadiene equilibrium (0.64)
cyclobutadiene transition (0.53)
benzene (0.47)
benzene dimer 4.95 Å (0.70)
benzene dimer 10 Å (0.61)
0 10 20 30 40
EVMC − EDMC (mEh)
0
5
10
15
20
25
EDMC − Eexact (mEh)
y = 0.62x - 0.08
a b
c d
FIG. 5. Benzene dimer calculated energy and the extrapolation based on VMC-DMC linear relation. a , The
energy of the T-shaped benzene dimer with a center-to-center distance of 4.95 ˚A as well as the CCSD(T) results as baselines.
The CCSD(T) / CBS* result is calculated using binding energy and monomer energy. See Supplementary Note 14 for details.
b, The ﬁtted distribution of binding energy from VMC, DMC and extrapolation results, where the solid lines inside each
violin represent the actual data points. The energy for two separated benzene molecules is calculated using a benzene dimer
separated by 10 ˚A [45]. The equilibrium conﬁguration is a T-shaped structure with center-to-center distance of 4.95 ˚A [43].
The experimental range is from Grover et al. [46]. The extrapolation scheme is based on the empirical linear relation between
VMC energy (EVMC) and DMC energy (EDMC) in the training process, indicated by the blue and yellow points in c. c, Linear
ﬁtting of EVMC−EDMC with respect to EDMC−Eﬁnal on various molecular systems, where Eﬁnal represents the DMC energy
at ﬁnal VMC training step. The number within the parenthesis in the legend is the ﬁtted slope for each system. d, Linear
ﬁtting of EVMC−EDMC with respect to EDMC−Eexact on atoms, where the energy data are the same as Fig. 2e. Note that
the data in d is fundamentally diﬀerent from c in the sense that the linearity in c is about diﬀerent training steps for the same
system while in d the linearity is measured across diﬀerent systems.
the DMC energy at the ﬁnal VMC training step, namely
a constant for one training process. Such relation is
shown in Fig. 5c. Based on this empirical linear rela-
tion, we propose an extrapolation scheme
E(k)
DMC−Eex =w· (E(k)
VMC−E(k)
DMC) +b (1)
where Eex is the extrapolated energy, and w and b are
two parameters to be determined. Here slope w can be
ﬁtted using E(k)
VMC andE(k)
DMC along the training process,
but the intercept b cannot be inferred from those data.
Therefore it is diﬃcult to use this scheme to extrapolate
absolute energy unless we have extra information on in-
tercept b. On the other hand, when calculating relative
energy, we may simply assume the intercept b between
diﬀerent conﬁgurations are the same so that it can be
canceled out in the calculation. Namely for relative en-
ergy, we have
∆Eex = (1 +w)· ∆EDMC−w· ∆EVMC (2)
Note that the calculation of relative energy is espe-
cially troublesome for neural-network based QMC meth-
ods, due to the strong dependence on the number of train-
ing steps and the long converging period. See Supplemen-
tary Figure 8b for how binding energies calculated with
FermiNet VMC and DMC change along the optimization
process. With our scheme, the binding energy results
calculated from diﬀerent VMC training steps would be
the same, modulo the ﬁtting error of the linear relation,
which means we can circumvent the dependence of the
binding energy result on the number of training steps.
In practice, the extrapolated binding energies form a well
concentrated distribution, and doing an extra average us-
ing diﬀerent VMC training steps can eliminate the linear
ﬁtting error and provide an accurate estimate. Moreover,
it also suggests that we can calculate the extrapolated
binding energy with data collected in the early phase of
the training process, avoiding the long converging period
10
of VMC optimization.
Applying this scheme to binding energy calculation of
a benzene dimer, the result is signiﬁcantly improved and
the distribution ﬁtted from energy diﬀerence of diﬀerent
VMC training steps is concentrated around the exper-
imental range, as shown in Fig. 5b. The estimate of
extrapolated binding energy by averaging the energy dif-
ference is 3.60 mHa, within the experimental range. See
Supplementary Note 13 for more extrapolation-related
details for benzene dimer.
We have discussed the relation of VMC and DMC en-
ergy for elements on the second and third rows in Sec-
tion II B. For each atom, we have a reference energy
data Eexact to be compared with converged VMC en-
ergy (EVMC) and DMC energy ( EDMC). As shown in
Fig. 2e, both EDMC−Eexact and EVMC−Eexact grow
linearly as the atomic number increases, though the slope
changes when switching from the second row elements to
the third row. However, if we instead compare
EDMC−Eexact v.s. EVMC−EDMC,
then we have a single linear relation across all elements
on both second and third rows, as shown in Fig. 5d.
Interestingly, the slope of ﬁtted lines in both Fig. 5c
and 5d are all quite close. We will leave further study on
those two types of linearity as future work.
III. DISCUSSION
FermiNet-DMC is able to achieve accurate ab initio
calculations for various systems, obtaining ground state
of 16 atoms, N 2 along the bonding curve, 2 cyclobutadi-
ene conﬁgurations, 10 hydrogen bonded water dimers,
benzene monomer and dimer. These systems include
bond breaking structures where strong static correlation
exists and weakly bonded dimers where dynamic cor-
relation dominates, and FermiNet-DMC performs con-
sistently well. FermiNet-DMC leverages the expressive
power of neural network to provide well-behaved trial
wavefunctions. Neural network based VMC has claimed
success in small systems when the network can be suﬃ-
ciently trained. However, it is not able to provide satis-
factory ground state wavefunction and energy when the
expressiveness of the neural network is limited. Com-
pared to VMC, the combination of neural network with
DMC provides a powerful solution, in the sense that it
can achieve more accurate result with simpler network
and better eﬃciency. The improvement of FermiNet-
DMC in eﬃciency can be up to 1 or 2 orders of magnitude
in the large systems tested in order to reach the same
accuracy level as FermiNet-VMC, which can become in-
creasingly more important when dealing with even larger
molecules.
There is an interesting linear relation between VMC
and DMC energy observed during the training process
as well as across diﬀerent systems. We develop an ex-
trapolation scheme accordingly, which greatly improves
the accuracy of relative energy calculation as shown in
the benzene dimer case and overcome the issue that the
relative energy calculation greatly depends on the diﬀer-
ent training steps in the QMC process. We also design a
divergence measuring the diﬀerence between nodal sur-
faces of two wavefunctions, which correlates well with the
corresponding DMC energies in numerical experiments.
Namely the proposed divergence successfully captures
the essence of nodal surface diﬀerences.
It is worth pointing out that a similar idea to this work
was proposed in a preprint by Wilson et al., where they
have performed preliminary tests on the second row el-
ements [37]. However, only minor improvements in ac-
curacy were observed accompanied by an increased cost
of DMC, since the FermiNet used there was powerful
enough to achieve high accuracy for the tested small sys-
tems and leave little room for further improvement. By
comparison, our approach, being more sophisticated and
eﬃcient, achieves signiﬁcant accuracy boost when deal-
ing with more challenging molecular systems, which Fer-
miNet alone cannot handle well. We have also shown
that even for small systems, FermiNet-DMC should still
be preferred for the fact that it can achieve comparable
or even better accuracy with a smaller network and much
less computation resources compared with FermiNet-
VMC. Our work, therefore, eliminates the negative con-
cerns of going from VMC to DMC with neural network
wavefunction ansatz. Moreover, the DMC method can be
further integrated with other powerful molecular neural
networks [22, 25], periodic neural network for solids [51],
neural networks with eﬀective core potential [52], which
has the potential to catalyze a paradigm shift in the ap-
plication of stochastic electronic structure methods.
IV. METHODS
A. Basic theory
To study a many-body system from ﬁrst principles,
we always consider solving the well-known Schr¨ odinger
equation for electrons and nuclei. When we work in the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation [53], and further con-
sider a ﬁxed set of nuclear positions, the problem is sim-
pliﬁed to the solution of the ground state many-electron
wavefunction.
ˆHψ(x1,··· , xn) =Eψ(x1,··· , xn), (3)
ˆH =−1
2
∑
i
∇2
i−
∑
I
∑
i
ZI
|ri− RI|
+
∑
i<j
1
|ri− rj| +
∑
I<J
ZIZJ
|RI− RJ|,
where xi = (ri,σi) denotes the spatial and spin coordi-
nates of electron i, and RI,ZI respectively denote the
spatial coordinates and the charge of nucleus I. The
wavefunction of electrons obeys Fermi-Dirac statistics
11
thus should be antisymmetric with respect to the in-
terchange of both the spatial coordinates and the spins
of any two electrons, namely the following equality
of wavefunction should hold: ψ(··· , xi,··· , xj,··· ) =
−ψ(··· , xj,··· , xi,··· ).
Unlike most methods that use variational principle
to approach the ground state wavefunction, DMC is a
stochastic projection method. A given antisymmetric
wavefunction ψT can always be represented as a linear
combination of a set of eigenfunctions ψk of the corre-
sponding Hamiltonian operator,
ψT (x1,··· , xn) =
∞∑
k=0
ckψk(x1,··· , xn), (4)
ˆHψk(x1,··· , xn) =Ekψk(x1,··· , xn),
When an imaginary time evolution operator acts on ψT ,
e−τ( ˆH−ET )ψT =
∞∑
k=0
cke−τ(Ek−ET )ψk, (5)
where ET is the trial energy as an oﬀset, there will be
a decay coeﬃcient added to each expansion term, and
the decay rate is proportional to state energy Ek. Af-
ter a long enough imaginary time evolution, ψT can
reach the ground stateψ0, whereas contributions from all
other eigenfuntions vanish. If we deﬁne a time-dependent
wavefunction and look at the imaginary-time Schr¨ odinger
equation:
ψ(x1,··· , xn,τ ) =e−τ( ˆH−ET )ψT (x1,··· , xn),
−∂τψ(x1,··· , xn,τ ) = ( ˆH−ET )ψ(x1,··· , xn,τ ).(6)
Without the potential energy terms, it resembles a stan-
dard diﬀusion equation,
∂τψ(x1,··· , xn,τ ) = 1
2
∑
i
∇2
iψ(x1,··· , xn,τ ). (7)
The diﬀusion equation deﬁnes the master equation of
stochastic processes, hence we can solve the diﬀusion
equation of wavefunction by simulating the stochastic
processes [54]. With potential terms, additional pro-
cesses are required to bind the diﬀusion equation in sim-
ulation (see, e.g., Refs. [16, 55, 56] for more details).
B. Trial wavefunction
In this work we use FermiNet neural network ansatz as
our trial wavefunction. Due to the huge number of pa-
rameters, it is challenging to converge the training pro-
cess of FermiNet unless the system is small enough. Af-
ter many tests, we identiﬁed a common training pattern
of FermiNet, which consists of two stages: a relatively
short sharp-adjustment stage and a lengthy ﬁne-tuning
one. We propose to use the FermiNet wavefunction right
after the sharp-adjustment stage as the trial wavefunc-
tion in DMC, which maximizes the eﬃciency of the en-
tire simulation protocol. In this way we can also achieve
more accurate results than a better converged FermiNet
model after the lengthy ﬁne-tuning stage. Comparing to
the gain, the cost of performing DMC on the long-trained
FermiNet is rather minor in most of the systems tested.
C. DMC implementation
We have developed a GPU-friendly DMC software in
JAX [57], which can be seamlessly integrated with Fer-
miNet [27], developed in the same programming frame-
work. Our DMC software can also be integrated with
other trial wavefunctions implemented in JAX and it has
been open sourced in order to accelerate further com-
bination of QMC methods with neural networks. See
Algorithm 1 for a brief workﬂow of one DMC iteration,
beyond which various of modiﬁcations are implemented,
including those proposed by Umrigar et al. to reduce
time-step error [55] and by Zen et al. to keep size consis-
tency [58].
Random walkers’ branching and merging change the
total number of walkers, which cause eﬃciency issue for
JAX program and is also not friendly to distributed com-
puting especially when load balancing is involved. We
devised a new branching-merging strategy to overcome
these issues. Whenever we need to branch certain ran-
dom walker due to its overly large weight, we also merge
two walkers on the same computing node with the small-
est weight. No merging is executed if no branching hap-
pens. In this way, we keep the number of walkers on
each computing node unchanged. We did thorough nu-
merical veriﬁcation of this strategy and found that the
introduced bias is negligible.
The most time-consuming module in our DMC imple-
mentation is to calculate the local energy. In our op-
timized program, the computational cost for each local
energy estimation is almost same as a VMC inference
step of the original FermiNet. Therefore, the total cost
depends solely on the number of iterations performed in
DMC and VMC.
D. Energy calculation
For FermiNet-VMC, we always perform a separate in-
ference simulation for energy estimate, where we ﬁx all
the parameters of FermiNet after training and do a num-
ber of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) steps to sam-
ple batches of random walkers accordingly. We calculate
the average local energy for each batch, and use reblock
analysis to determine the mean value of the set of av-
eraged energy as well as the standard deviation. For
FermiNet-DMC, we use the mixed estimator of energy
[55] and treat the ﬁrst 10% of MC steps as the equili-
brating phase and only use the steps afterwards for en-
ergy production. See Supplementary Table 6-12 for the
hyperparameters of all our calculations. We also use re-
block analysis to determine the mean of the averaged
12
Algorithm 1: Simpliﬁed Diﬀusion Monte Carlo
algorithm pseudocode.
Data: number of walkers M, walkers’ positions r,
walkers’ weightω, value and sign of the trial
wavefunction ΨT (r), sign(ΨT (r)), drift
velocity vD(r), local energy EL(r).
Output: accept ratio of trial moves pmove, trial
energy ET , mixed estimated energy ED.
1 for N DM C
max do
2 for each walker do
3 ξ∼N(0,τ )
4 r′ = r +τ vD(r) +ξ
5 compute ΨT (r′), sign(ΨT (r′)), vD(r′)
6 G(r→ r′) = exp
[
−(r′− r−τ vD(r))2/2τ
]
7 G(r′→ r) = exp
[
−(r− r′−τ vD(r′))2/2τ
]
8 p = min
{
1, G(r′→r)ΨT (r′)2
G(r→r′)ΨT (r)2
}
9 if sign(ΨT (r′))⁄= sign(ΨT (r)) then
10 p = 0
11 end
12 α∼U(0, 1)
13 if p≥α then
// Diffuse
14 compute EL(r′)
15 w←w×exp[−τ(EL(r)+EL(r′)−2ET )/2]
16 r← r′
17 ΨT (r)← ΨT (r′)
18 sign(ΨT (r))← sign(ΨT (r′))
19 vD(r)← vD(r′)
20 EL(r)←EL(r′)
21 end
22 end
23 compute pmove
24 ET =ET− log
∑ w
M
25 ED =
∑ wEL(r)∑ w
26 end
energy and its standard error. In our plots, error bars
represent one standard error for energy estimates, unless
otherwise speciﬁed.
Note that walkers in DMC are more auto-correlated
than the ones in VMC inference phase especially when
the time step used in DMC is set to be small to avoid bias.
Therefore more batches of random walkers are needed to
reduce the statistical error to a given level in DMC than
in VMC. However in practice, we found that the number
of the required extra batches of walkers in DMC is usually
much fewer than the number of steps in VMC training
phase for full convergence.
E. Nodal structure and wavefunction visualization
The three dimensional cuts of the full 11D nodal struc-
ture of Be in Fig. 2b-d is plotted according to the rules
of Bressanini et al. [30]. The four electrons’ spherical
coordinates are respectively



r1∈ [0.1, 2.1] a.u., φ1 = 0, θ 1∈ [−1, 1],
r2 = 1.1 a.u., φ 2 = 0, θ 2 =π/2,
r3∈ [0.1, 2.1] a.u., φ3 =π/2, θ 3 =π/2,
r4 = 1.1 a.u., φ 4 = 3π/2, θ4 =π/2,
ﬁxing all the degrees of freedom except r1, θ1 and r3.
The green surfaces in the plots show the nodal surfaces,
i.e. the places where the value of wavefunction is zero.
To visualize the nodal surface of benzene, we calculated
the wavefunction value on 2-dimensional slices of the 126-
dimensional space. We ﬁrst ﬁxed a 126-dimensional elec-
tron conﬁguration at the representative position of ben-
zene electronic structure from Liu et al. [42], and per-
turb it slightly for the visualization purpose. To con-
struct one slice of the 126-dimensional space, we move
a single spin-up electron in a 2-dimensional square with
all other 41 electrons ﬁxed. Then we apply FermiNet
to points on each slice and display the log-scaled mag-
nitude of the evaluated wavefunction value, where the
points with small value stand for the nodes on each slice.
Since the FermiNet output is unnormalized, diagrams for
diﬀerent FermiNet may have drastically diﬀerent range of
displayed value.
F. Divergence measuring nodal surface diﬀerence
We deﬁne a divergence measuring the diﬀerence be-
tween two sets S1 and S2 in any metric space as follows
D(S1,S 2) =EY∼ P1 d(Y, S2) ≈
K∑
i
d(Yi, S2) (8)
whereP1 is a probability measure onS1, and{Yi}i=1,...,K
are sampled from P1. The distance d(Y,S ) between a
single point Y and a set S is deﬁned as the smallest
distance between Y and any point in S, namely
d(Y,S ) = min
Z∈S
d(Y,Z ) (9)
For a nodal surface S corresponding to an unnormal-
ized wavefunction Ψ, we would like to deﬁne a measure
on S such that a small area on S is assigned larger weight
if its neighbourhood has larger Ψ 2 value, namely larger
probability to be visited by walkers in DMC. Therefore,
we consider a neighbourhood
Sϵ ={x|d(x,S )<ϵ} (10)
around S and a mapping
φ :Sϵ→S,
then ”push forward” the probability density mΨ2 (corre-
sponding to Ψ 2) from Sϵ to S via φ, namely
φ◦mΨ2(n) :=mΨ2(φ−1(s)) =
∫
φ−1(s) Ψ2
∫
Sϵ
Ψ2 , ∀ set s⊂S
(11)
13
Intuitively, for any point y in Sϵ we may simply choose
φ(y) to be the point on N that is closest to y.
However, it’s quite diﬃcult to determine both Sϵ and
φ mentioned above algorithmically, and thus, in prac-
tice, we use some approximate alternatives that are much
easier to compute. See Supplementary Note 15 for the
algorithmic detail.
Data Availability
All data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are pro-
vided in Supplementary Information.
Code Availability
We have released our DMC software at https://
github.com/bytedance/jaqmc.
REFERENCES
[1] J. A. Pople, Nobel lecture: Quantum chemical models,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1267 (1999).
[2] W. Kohn, Nobel lecture: Electronic structure of matter—
wave functions and density functionals, Rev. Mod. Phys.
71, 1253 (1999).
[3] T. Helgaker et al. , Recent advances in wave function-
based methods of molecular-property calculations,
Chemical Reviews 112, 543 (2012).
[4] Y. Cao et al., Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum
computing, Chemical Reviews 119, 10856 (2019).
[5] J. Kirkpatrick et al. , Pushing the frontiers of density
functionals by solving the fractional electron problem,
Science 374, 1385 (2021).
[6] J. G. Brandenburg, A. Zen, D. Alf` e, and A. Michaelides,
Interaction between water and carbon nanostructures:
How good are current density functional approxima-
tions?, The Journal of Chemical Physics 151, 164702
(2019).
[7] Y. S. Al-Hamdani et al. , Interactions between large
molecules pose a puzzle for reference quantum mechani-
cal methods, Nature Communications 12, 1 (2021).
[8] J. J. Eriksen et al., The Ground State Electronic Energy
of Benzene, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
11, 8922 (2020).
[9] K. T. Williams et al. , Direct Comparison of Many-Body
Methods for Realistic Electronic Hamiltonians, Physical
Review X 10, 011041 (2020).
[10] G. H. Booth, A. J. Thom, and A. Alavi, Fermion monte
carlo without ﬁxed nodes: A game of life, death, and
annihilation in slater determinant space, The Journal of
chemical physics 131, 054106 (2009).
[11] C. J. Umrigar, J. Toulouse, C. Filippi, S. Sorella, and
R. G. Hennig, Alleviation of the fermion-sign problem by
optimization of many-body wave functions, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 98, 110201 (2007).
[12] P. R. C. Kent et al. , QMCPACK: Advances in the de-
velopment, eﬃciency, and application of auxiliary ﬁeld
and real-space variational and diﬀusion quantum Monte
Carlo, The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 174105
(2020).
[13] R. J. Needs, M. D. Towler, N. D. Drummond,
P. L´ opez R´ ıos, and J. R. Trail, Variational and diﬀusion
quantum Monte Carlo calculations with the CASINO
code, The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 154106
(2020).
[14] J. B. Anderson, A random-walk simulation of the
schr¨ odinger equation: H +
3 , The Journal of Chemical
Physics 63, 1499 (1975).
[15] J. B. Anderson, Quantum chemistry by random walk.
H2P , H+
3 D3h
1A
′
1, H2
3Σ+
u , H4
1Σ+
g , Be 1S, The Journal
of Chemical Physics 65, 4121 (1976).
[16] W. M. C. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. J. Needs, and G. Ra-
jagopal, Quantum Monte Carlo simulations of solids, Re-
views of Modern Physics 73, 33 (2001).
[17] M. Bajdich, L. Mitas, L. K. Wagner, and K. E. Schmidt,
Pfaﬃan pairing and backﬂow wavefunctions for electronic
structure quantum monte carlo methods, Phys. Rev. B
77, 115112 (2008).
[18] P. L´ opez R´ ıos, A. Ma, N. D. Drummond, M. D. Towler,
and R. J. Needs, Inhomogeneous backﬂow transforma-
tions in quantum monte carlo calculations, Phys. Rev. E
74, 066701 (2006).
[19] J. Han, L. Zhang, and W. E, Solving many-electron
schr¨ odinger equation using deep neural networks, Journal
of Computational Physics 399, 108929 (2019).
[20] D. Pfau, J. Spencer, A. de G. Matthews, and W. Foulkes,
Ab-initio solution of the many-electron schr¨ odinger equa-
tion with deep neural networks, Phys. Rev. Research 2,
033429 (2020).
[21] J. S. Spencer, D. Pfau, A. Botev, and W. M. C.
Foulkes, Better, Faster Fermionic Neural Networks,
arXiv:2011.07125 [physics] (2020).
[22] J. Hermann, Z. Sch¨ atzle, and F. No´ e, Deep-neural-
network solution of the electronic Schr¨ odinger equation,
Nature Chemistry 12, 891 (2020).
[23] M. Entwistle, Z. Sch¨ atzle, P. A. Erdman, J. Hermann,
and F. No´ e, Electronic excited states in deep variational
monte carlo, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09472 (2022).
[24] J. Lin, G. Goldshlager, and L. Lin, Explicitly antisym-
metrized neural network layers for variational monte
carlo simulation (2021), arXiv:2112.03491 [physics.comp-
ph].
[25] M. Scherbela, R. Reisenhofer, L. Gerard, P. Marque-
tand, and P. Grohs, Solving the electronic schr¨ odinger
equation for multiple nuclear geometries with weight-
sharing deep neural networks, Nature Computational Sci-
ence 10.1038/s43588-022-00228-x (2022).
[26] N. Gao and S. G¨ unnemann, Ab-Initio Potential Energy
Surfaces by Pairing GNNs with Neural Wave Functions,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05064 (2021).
[27] D. P. James S. Spencer and F. Contributors, FermiNet
(2020).
[28] M. Caﬀarel, Quantum monte carlo for chemistry
@ toulouse, http://qmcchem.ups-tlse.fr/index.php/
Quantum_Monte_Carlo_for_Chemistry_@_Toulouse/.
[29] S. J. Chakravorty, S. R. Gwaltney, E. R. Davidson, F. A.
Parpia, and C. F. p Fischer, Ground-state correlation
energies for atomic ions with 3 to 18 electrons, Physical
Review A 47, 3649 (1993).
[30] D. Bressanini, Implications of the two nodal domains con-
jecture for ground state fermionic wave functions, Phys-
14
ical Review B 86, 115120 (2012).
[31] R. J. Le Roy, Y. Huang, and C. Jary, An accurate ana-
lytic potential function for ground-state n 2 from a direct-
potential-ﬁt analysis of spectroscopic data, The Journal
of chemical physics 125, 164310 (2006).
[32] R. J. Gdanitz, Accurately solving the electronic
schr¨ odinger equation of atoms and molecules using ex-
plicitly correlated (r12-) mr-ci: the ground state poten-
tial energy curve of n2, Chemical physics letters 283, 253
(1998).
[33] D. I. Lyakh, M. Musia/suppress l, V. F. Lotrich, and R. J. Bartlett,
Multireference nature of chemistry: The coupled-cluster
view, Chemical reviews 112, 182 (2012).
[34] B. J. Smith, D. J. Swanton, J. A. Pople, H. F. Schae-
fer III, and L. Radom, Transition structures for the in-
terchange of hydrogen atoms within the water dimer, The
Journal of chemical physics 92, 1240 (1990).
[35] G. S. Tschumper et al. , Anchoring the water dimer po-
tential energy surface with explicitly correlated compu-
tations and focal point analyses, The Journal of chemical
physics 116, 690 (2002).
[36] M. Gillan, F. Manby, M. Towler, and D. Alf` e, Assessing
the accuracy of quantum monte carlo and density func-
tional theory for energetics of small water clusters, The
Journal of chemical physics 136, 244105 (2012).
[37] M. Wilson, N. Gao, F. Wudarski, E. Rieﬀel, and N. M.
Tubman, Simulations of state-of-the-art fermionic neural
network wave functions with diﬀusion monte carlo, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.12570 (2021).
[38] M. J. Gillan, D. Alf` e, and A. Michaelides, Perspective:
How good is DFT for water?, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 144, 130901 (2016).
[39] D. G. A. Smith et al. , Psi4 1.4: Open-source soft-
ware for high-throughput quantum chemistry, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 184108 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0006002.
[40] R. D. J. III, Nist computational chemistry compari-
son and benchmark database, nist standard reference
database number 101 (2021).
[41] J. J. Eriksen et al., The ground state electronic energy of
benzene, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 11,
8922 (2020).
[42] Y. Liu, P. Kilby, T. J. Frankcombe, and T. W. Schmidt,
The electronic structure of benzene from a tiling of the
correlated 126-dimensional wavefunction, Nature Com-
munications 11, 1210 (2020).
[43] M. Pitonak et al. , Benzene dimer: high-level wave func-
tion and density functional theory calculations, Journal
of chemical theory and computation 4, 1829 (2008).
[44] Z. Sch¨ atzle, J. Hermann, and F. No´ e, Convergence to
the ﬁxed-node limit in deep variational monte carlo, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 154, 124108 (2021).
[45] S. Azadi and R. Cohen, Chemical accuracy from quan-
tum monte carlo for the benzene dimer, The Journal of
chemical physics 143, 104301 (2015).
[46] J. R. Grover, E. A. Walters, and E. T. Hui, Dissocia-
tion energies of the benzene dimer and dimer cation, The
Journal of Physical Chemistry 91, 3233 (1987).
[47] Y. S. Al-Hamdani et al. , Interactions between large
molecules pose a puzzle for reference quantum mechani-
cal methods, Nature Communications 12, 3927 (2021).
[48] S. Tsuzuki, K. Honda, T. Uchimaru, M. Mikami, and
K. Tanabe, Origin of attraction and directionality of
the π/π interaction: Model chemistry calculations of
benzene dimer interaction, Journal of the American
Chemical Society 124, 104 (2002), pMID: 11772067,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja0105212.
[49] M. O. Sinnokrot, E. F. Valeev, and C. D. Sher-
rill, Estimates of the ab initio limit for π-π interac-
tions: The benzene dimer, Journal of the American
Chemical Society 124, 10887 (2002), pMID: 12207544,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja025896h.
[50] A. Zen, J. G. Brandenburg, A. Michaelides, and D. Alf` e,
A new scheme for ﬁxed node diﬀusion quantum monte
carlo with pseudopotentials: Improving reproducibility
and reducing the trial-wave-function bias, The Journal
of Chemical Physics 151, 134105 (2019).
[51] X. Li, Z. Li, and J. Chen, Ab initio calculation of real
solids via neural network ansatz, Nature Communica-
tions 13, 7895 (2022).
[52] X. Li, C. Fan, W. Ren, and J. Chen, Fermionic neu-
ral network with eﬀective core potential, Phys. Rev. Re-
search 4, 013021 (2022).
[53] M. Born and R. Oppenheimer, Zur quantentheorie der
molekeln, Annalen der physik 389, 457 (1927).
[54] S. Karlin and H. E. Taylor, A second course in stochastic
processes (Elsevier, 1981).
[55] C. Umrigar, M. Nightingale, and K. Runge, A diﬀusion
monte carlo algorithm with very small time-step errors,
The Journal of chemical physics 99, 2865 (1993).
[56] P. J. Reynolds, J. Tobochnik, and H. Gould, Diﬀu-
sion quantum monte carlo, Computers in Physics 4, 662
(1990).
[57] J. Bradbury et al. , JAX: composable transformations of
Python+NumPy programs (2018).
[58] A. Zen, S. Sorella, M. J. Gillan, A. Michaelides, and
D. Alfe, Boosting the accuracy and speed of quantum
monte carlo: Size consistency and time step, Physical
Review B 93, 241118 (2016).
Acknowledgments
This work is directed and supported by Hang Li and ByteDance
Research. We thank Yubing Qian for providing preliminary set-
tings for water dimer simulations. We thank Weinan E, Xiang Li,
Kai Zheng, Ke Liao and Yu Liu for fruitful discussions. We thank
Mike Entwistle and James Spencer for sharing data and results.
We thank Michel Caﬀarel for allowing us to use an adapted version
of the ﬁgure on his website. We thank Shaochen Shi, Xiaoying
Jia, Xin Liu and Chenlin Chai for engineering improvement on our
DMC software. We thank the rest of ByteDance Research team for
inspiration and encouragement. J.C. is supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China under Grant No. 2021YFA1400500,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
No. 92165101 and No. 11974024, and the Strategic Priority Re-
search Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant No.
XDB33000000.
Author contributions
W.R. and J.C. conceived the study; W.R. implemented the main
code with important contributions from W.F.; W.R. and W.F. per-
formed simulations, data analyses, and ﬁgure designing. X.W. per-
formed CCSD(T) related calculation. J.C. supervised the project.
W.R., W.F., X.W., and J.C. wrote the paper.
15
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Supplementary Information: Towards the ground state of molecules via
diﬀusion Monte Carlo on neural networks
Weiluo Ren1, Weizhong Fu1,2, Xiaojie Wu1, and Ji Chen2,3
1ByteDance Research, Zhonghang Plaza, No. 43, North 3rd Ring West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, People’s Republic of China
2School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China
3Interdisciplinary Institute of Light-Element Quantum Materials, Frontiers Science Center for Nano-Optoelectronics, Peking University, Beijing
100871, People’s Republic of China
Supplementary Note 1. Additional software detail
In the method section, we have brieﬂy described the DMC software developed for this work, including key methodological details.
Here we add a few more points, and a complete description of our software will be published elsewhere.
OurimplementationofDMCisscaling-outfriendly. WehavetestedoursoftwareonaGPUclusterwith16computingnodesand
128 Nvidia V100 GPU cards, and obtained near-linear speed-up. Our software saves checkpoint for DMC periodically and uploads
to a remote storage cluster so that it can be resilient to occasional preemption due to cluster scheduling and device failure, and it is
able to continue the process with the most recent checkpoint downloaded when a rescheduling is triggered.
In order to support multi-node computation eﬃciently, we have to minimize the inter-nodes communication, listed below:
• We calculate the total energy with local energy and weights for all the walkers across all the nodes.
• We also calculate several metrics with across-node aggregation, such as acceptance rate, number of outliers and etc.
• We synchronize the action of uploading and downloading checkpoints.
We have not yet supported across-node load balancing in terms of walkers, which could cause large communication overhead. As a
matteroffact,wehavedevisedabranching-mergingalgorithmwhichﬁxesthewalkersizepercomputingnodesothatwedonotneed
to apply across-node walker load balancing at all. Every time when we do branching at the presence of a large-weight walker, we
simultaneously ﬁnd two walkers on the same node but with the smallest weight and merge them. Note that if the trial wavefunction
hasgoodqualityandwehaveadecentnumberofwalkersoneachnode,thensuchanactiondoesnotintroducemuchbias,conﬁrmed
in our calculations and shown in Supplementary Note 3. We only use the ﬁxed-size branching scheme for relatively large systems,
such as cyclobutadience, benzene molecule and benzene dimers, in which cases eﬃciency is crucial due to the computation power
limit and the ﬁxed-node error dominates the extra bias introduced by this branching scheme.
In order to revert the eﬀect of changing trial energy, the energy produced from each DMC step should be corrected accordingly
before averaged. However, as pointed in [1], when the batch size is large enough, the eﬀect of such correction is negligible, which is
consistentwithourexperience. Furthermore,itiseasiertodoreblockinganalysis[2]toassessstatisticalerrorwithoutsuchcorrection.
Therefore, for all the results reported here, we do not include such energy corrections in our computation.
Wehavealsoimplementedtheelectron-by-electronschemesuggestedbyCASINO[3],whereeachwalkermoveselectronsoneby
one rather than all at once. Our tests show that the electron-by-electron scheme leads to a signiﬁcant increase in the acceptance ratio
ofwalkerswithlargetime-steps,butwedonotseemuchimprovementonthetime-steperrororauto-correlationperiod. Besides,our
electron-by-electron implementation sequentially goes over all the electrons in one conﬁguration, leading to a decline in computing
eﬃciency when dealing with large systems. So this option is also switched oﬀ by default.
Supplementary Note 2. Finite time-step error
WehaveimplementedtheZSGMAapproachproposedbyZenetal. toreducetheﬁnitetime-steperror[4]. Astestedinvarioussystems
in literature our default setting10−3 is usually small enough to reach convergence. Here we show a test on the cyclobutadience with
equilibrium structure as an example. The results are displayed in Supplementary Fig. 1, from which we can conclude that the ﬁnite
time-steperrorforourdefaultsetting 10−3 iswellbelow1mHa,comparabletothestatisticalerror. Basedonthisobservationaswell
as the eﬃciency concern, we use time-step10−3 by default and use it in all of our FermiNet-DMC calculations.
Toobtaincomparablestatisticalerrorofthereportedenergy,weusediﬀerentnumberofDMCstepsforeachtime-steptocompen-
sate diﬀerent level of auto-correlation in the energy time series. For time-step10−3, we run DMC for105 steps. For large time-steps
like 0.01 or 0.03, we only run DMC for104 steps while for small time-step like10−4, we run DMC for106 steps.
1
arXiv:2204.13903v2  [physics.chem-ph]  10 Apr 2023
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030
DMC time step
154.682
154.680
154.678
154.676
154.674
Energy (Eh)
Fitted value
DMC energy
Supplementary Figure 1/u⎪i007C.varTime-step dependence of the total energy of cyclobutadience with equilibrium structure. The pink curve is generated
by doing a quadratic ﬁtting on the collected DMC energy data points.
Supplementary Note 3. DMC options
To investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent hyperparameters of our DMC software, especially the bias introduced in diﬀerent settings, we
compare the DMC energy calculated with the settings listed in Supplementary Table 1, using cyclobutadience with equilibrium
structureasanexample. ThetrialwavefunctionisaFermiNettrainedwith 105 steps. SeeNote9formoretrainingdetails. Theresult
isdisplayedinSupplementaryFig. 2. Takingthestatisticalerrorintoaccount, allsettingsagreewitheachotherwellexceptthemost
inaccurate one with time-step10−2.
Supplementary Table 1/u⎪i007C.varWe test our DMC software with diﬀerent hyperparameters, listed as follows. “time step” is the DMC time-step. “equi-
libriumphaselength”isthelengthofphaseinthebeginningofthewholeDMCprocessduringwhichwedonotcollectstatisticsforreportpurpose.
“totalnumberofsteps”isthenumberofstepsinthewholeDMCprocess. “energywindowsize”isthelengthoftherollingwindowfortrial-energy
update. “ﬁx size” indicates whether we ﬁx the number of DMC walkers on each computing node or not. “energy cutoﬀ” is the parameter/u1D6FCin the
cutoﬀ scheme proposed in [4] and indicates the level of energy clipping.
Identiﬁer time step equilibrium phase length total number of steps energy window size ﬁx size energy cutoﬀ
time step10−2 10−2 2×10 3 104 103 True 2
time step10−3 (default) 10−3 2×10 4 105 104 True 2
time step10−4 10−4 2×10 5 106 105 True 2
window5×10 4 10−3 105 2×10 5 5×10 4 True 2
vary size 10−3 2×10 4 105 104 False 2
energy cutoﬀ 4 10−3 2×10 4 105 104 True 4
2
time step
 10 2
time step
 10 3
(default)
time step
 10 4
window
 5 × 104
vary size energy cutoff
4
154.675
154.674
154.673
Energy (Eh)
Supplementary Figure 2/u⎪i007C.varDMC energy and statistical error for diﬀerent settings listed in Supplementary Table 1. The pink patch indicates the
one-standard-errorintervalofenergyinthemostaccuratesettingwithtimestep 10−4. Alltheerrorbarsareoverlappedwiththisintervalexceptthe
most inaccurate setting with time-step10−2.
Supplementary Note 4. Eﬃciency
In this section, we compare the eﬃciency between FermiNet-VMC [5–7] and FermiNet-DMC. The evaluation of FermiNet’s local
energy dominates the whole FermiNet-DMC process in terms of computation time. In other words, for one step, the diﬀerence
between runtime of FermiNet-DMC and the inference phase of FermiNet-VMC is negligible.
However, DMC usually requires more steps to reduce the statistical error to a given level compared to VMC inference phase,
because DMC has to use small time-step to avoid ﬁnite time-step error while VMC can use large time-step in Markov chain Monte
Carlo(MCMC)toobtainlesscorrelatedsamples. TocutdownthestatisticalerrormoreeﬀectivelyinDMC,wecanincreasethebatch
size so that eachbatch contains more independent walkers. In practice, we start FermiNet-DMC procedurefrom the FermiNet-VMC
walkers. To increase the DMC batch size, we duplicate the VMC walkers and then do MCMC for a period of time to get a larger
batch of uncorrelated walkers, used as the starting walkers in DMC. Even if we do not enlarge the batch size, we still do a number of
MCMC steps using ﬁxed FermiNet before DMC so that the walkers is distributed closer to the square of FermiNet’s wavefunction,
which serve better starting point for DMC. Note that doing MCMC with FermiNet is much faster than doing DMC since no local
energycalculationisinvolved. Inourexperiments,weuselargerDMCbatchsizeonlywhenhandlingbenzenedimers,inwhichcase
DMC uses batch size 16384 and VMC uses batch size 4096.
OverallFermiNet-DMCisstillamuchmoreeﬃcientsolutionthanFermiNet-VMC,becauseitcandrasticallycutdownthelength
of the training phase of VMC which is signiﬁcantly longer than the DMC itself. As a matter of fact, in the calculations that we
performed, FermiNet-DMC can reach the same or even better accuracy level with a FermiNet trained with only one tenth or even a
smaller fraction of total number of steps compare to the fully converged FermiNet-VMC.
Supplementary Note 5. Details on large systems
When dealing with relatively large systems containing dozens if not hundreds of electrons, chances are that we can not aﬀord a
largeenoughnetworktowellrepresentthegroundstatewavefunction. SeveralissuesemergeinthisregimewhentrainingFermiNet.
Firstly, the under-ﬁt FermiNet may hit outliers hurting the convergence process. What’s worse, the training process may hit NAN
issueoccasionally. WeremovedtheoutliersintermsoflocalenergywhencalculatingthegradientintheFermiNet’strainingprocess.
This helps to stabilize the calculation of the average and standard deviation of local energies in a batch, which beneﬁts the gradient
clippingprocess. Withoutsuchoutlier-removaloperation,atthepresenceofoneormoreoutliers,thegradientclippingisnoteﬀective
since we are not able to determine the clipping level correctly.
Secondly,thedeterminantcalculationoflarge-dimensionmatrixisnumericallytroublesome. Potentially,therecouldbeoverﬂow
andunderﬂowissuesespeciallywhenusingsingleprecision. Besidesthat,thereisusuallyadominatingdeterminantamongmultiple
determinants, which makes the value of other determinants eﬀectively zero due to ﬂoat number rounding. Therefore, we only use a
singledeterminantwhendealingwithlargesystemssothattheprocessbecomesmoreeﬃcientandstable. Admittedly,thislimitsthe
network expressiveness, and further improvements are left for future work.
Thirdly, the under-ﬁtted decaying behavior of electron density at a distance may cause serious issues, introducing outliers in the
calculationoftotalenergy. Forinstance,therecouldbewalkersoccasionallydiﬀusingawayfromatomsandreachingareaswherethe
3
neuralnetworkisnotwelltrained,whichcausestroubleforthecalculationoftotalenergyanditsgradient. Weuseisotropicenvelope
[6] to maintain the exponentially decaying behavior of the wavefunction when the electron is away from all the atoms, which also
helps to improve the eﬃciency of both FermiNet-VMC and FermiNet-DMC.
Supplementary Note 6. Common Hyperparameters
Allofourcalculationsfollowthesameprocedure. FirstwetrainFermiNetwithVMC[5–7],thenweusethetrainedFermiNetastrial
wavefunction in DMC. To obtain reliable energy from VMC, we run a separate inference process with the trained FermiNet. There
are some hyperparameters shared by all the calculations in this work, as listed in Supplementary Table 2.
Supplementary Table 2/u⎪i007C.varCommon hyperparameters
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
VMC optimizer KFAC [8, 9] Batch size 4096
Precision Float32 Full determinant True
DMC time-step 10−3
Supplementary Note 7. Atoms
A rather small neural network is used in calculations of single atoms (see Fig. 1e of main text), and all the training processes have
well converged. The corresponding hyperparameters are listed in Supplementary Table 3.
Supplementary Table 3/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for single atoms calculations in Fig. 2e.
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 32 Dimension of two electron layer 4
Number of layers 2 Number of determinants 1
Envelope type full VMC learning rate 5×10 −4
Number of training steps ≥5×10 5 Number of inference steps 105
Number of DMC steps 2×10 5 MCMC steps between each iterations 100
Outlier removal false Fixed-size branching false
Supplementary Note 8. Nitrogen Molecule
Note that our FermiNet-VMC result shown in Fig. 3a of main text is better than the reported FermiNet result in [5]. The main
diﬀerence is that our calculation uses the full determinant mode, which boosts the accuracy of FermiNet-VMC, as pointed out in
[6, 10].
Supplementary Table 4/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for nitrogen dissuciation curve calculations in Fig. 3a of main text.
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 256 Dimension of two electron layer 32
Number of layers 4 Number of determinants 16
Envelope type full VMC learning rate 10−4
Number of training steps 2×10 5 Number of inference steps 105
Number of DMC steps 2×10 5 MCMC steps between each iterations 10
Outlier removal false Fixed-size branching false
Supplementary Note 9. Cyclobutadiene
We use the default network structure in the open-source FermiNet repository for cyclobutadiene, and train two neural networks for
the equilibrium and transition state conﬁgurations separately. The training process was converged after5×10 5 steps, as shown in
Supplementary Fig. 3. We use FermiNet trained with105 and5×10 5 steps, and run FermiNet-DMC and FermiNet-VMC inference
processes accordingly. The results are listed in Supplementary Table 6, where we also include the results from [6] for comparison.
4
Supplementary Table 5/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for cyclobutadiene related calculations
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 256 Dimension of two electron layer 32
Number of layers 4 Number of determinants 16
Envelope type full VMC learning rate 10−4
Number of training steps 5×10 5 Number of inference steps 105
Number of DMC steps 105 MCMC steps between each iterations 10
Outlier removal false Fixed-size branching true
Supplementary Table 6/u⎪i007C.varCyclobutadiene ground state energy in Hartree. “VMC” and “DMC” indicates our FermiNet-VMC and FermiNet-DMC
resultsrespectively. ForFermiNet-DMC,weincluderesultscorrespondingtoFermiNettrainedwith 105 and5×105 steps. “VMC∗”indicatesresults
from [6].
Conﬁguration VMC DMC VMC∗
105 step 5×10 5 step 105 step 5×10 5 step
Equilibrium -154.6577(1) -154.6655(1) -154.6740(3) -154.6770(2) -154.6719(1)
Transition -154.6430(1) -154.6505(1) -154.6585(3) -154.6611(2) -154.6554(1)
0 1 2 3 4 5
VMC Training Steps ×105
154.67
154.66
154.65
154.64
154.63
154.62
Energy (Eh)
VMC: equilibrium
VMC*: equilibrium
DMC: equilibrium at 105 step
DMC: equilibrium at 5 × 105 step
VMC: transition
VMC*: transition
DMC: transition at 105 step
DMC: transition at 5 × 105 step
Supplementary Figure 3/u⎪i007C.varThe FermiNet-VMC training curve and FermiNet-DMC energy for cyclobutadience equilibrium and transition con-
ﬁgurations. “VMC” and “DMC” indicates our FermiNet-VMC and FermiNet-DMC results respectively. For FermiNet-DMC, we show results
corresponding to FermiNet trained with105 and5×10 5 steps. “VMC∗” indicates results from [6].
5
Supplementary Note 10. Water Dimer
The 10 structures of water dimer and their point-group symmetries are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The energy curves of
FermiNet-VMC and corresponding FermiNet-DMC energy are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5, where all the VMC training curves
show a clear “elbow” pattern and transition to the slow-converging phase around105 step. The FermiNet-DMC energy at105 step is
alreadylowerthanthecorrespondingFermiNet-VMCenergyat 3×10 5 stepforallstructures. Actually,formoststructurestheVMC
energy curve is still not converged at3×10 5 step. In principle, convergence in VMC training stage is necessary to investigate the
energy diﬀerence. All the relative energy results are shown here in Supplementary Fig. 6. In Fig. 3d of main text we see that the
mean absolute deviation of the relative energy results of FermiNet-DMC are much better than VMC’s, especially at105 step when
the networks are undertrained. This is reasonable as the nodal surface, which contains the zero order information of wave function,
naturally requires fewer training steps to converge. In conclusion, to calculate the relative energy, DMC is a much more eﬃcient and
reliable choice compared with VMC.
Supplementary Table 7/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for water dimer calculations in Fig. 3d of the main text.
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 256 Dimension of two electron layer 32
Number of layers 4 Number of determinants 16
Envelope type full VMC learning rate 10−4
Number of training steps 3×10 5 Number of inference steps 105
Number of DMC steps 2×10 5 MCMC steps between each iterations 100
Outlier removal false Fixed-size branching false
f jihg
SP6  C2h  planar SP10  C2v  planarSP9  C2vSP8  C2hSP7  Cs
a edcb
SP5  C2SP4  CiSP3  Cs  planarSP2  C1SP1  Cs
Supplementary Figure 4/u⎪i007C.varGeometries of the SP/u1D45B(/u1D45B=1,2,...,10) structures of water dimer, with their point-group symmetry labels.
a dcb e
f ihg j
Supplementary Figure 5/u⎪i007C.varTotal energy results of the SP/u1D45B(/u1D45B=1,2,...,10) structures of water dimer.
6
SP2 SP3 SP4 SP5 SP6 SP7 SP8 SP9 SP10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6Energy-ESP1 (mEh)
undertrained FermiNet-VMC
well-trained FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC with undertrained FermiNet-VMC
FermiNet-DMC with well-trained FermiNet-VMC
DMC (others' work)
CCSD(T)
Supplementary Figure 6/u⎪i007C.varRelative energy results of the SP/u1D45B(/u1D45B=2,3,...,10) structures of water dimer to the SP1 structure.
Supplementary Note 11. Benzene
We trained a 3-layer and a 4-layer FermiNet for the benzene molecule. The common hyperparameters for both networks are listed
in Supplementary Table 8. The hyperparameters indicating the network quality are described in Supplementary Table 9 and 10,
respectively. The energy calculated are listed in Supplementary Table 11.
Supplementary Table 8/u⎪i007C.varCommon hyperparameters for benzene related calculations
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Number of determinants 1 Envelope type isotropic
Number of VMC inference steps 105 Number of DMC steps 2×10 5
Learning rate 0.1 MCMC steps between each iterations 100
Outlier removal True Fixed-size branching true
Supplementary Table 9/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for 3-layer FermiNet for the benzene molecule
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 128 Dimension of two electron layer 8
Number of layers 3 Number of VMC training steps 2×10 6
In Supplementary Fig. 7, we provide more visualization of the log scaled magnitude of wavefunction on slices of the electronic
conﬁguration space as supplement to the main text Fig. 4. As described in main text Section II F, the slices are generated by moving
a single spin-up electron while keeping all others ﬁxed in their representative positions. In Supplementary Fig. 7 , the moving
electrons are corresponding to the C-H bonds in a benzene. Note that there is no symmetry built in the neural network, while we can
stillseeclearpatternsacrossdiﬀerentsubplotsinSupplementaryFig. 7,indicatingthatFermiNetsuccessfullylearnedthesymmetric
property of this system. Moreover, the node structure near the light area, namely the one with larger wavefunction magnitude and
larger probability to be sampled in the VMC process, shares higher level of similarity. Intuitively, this part of nodes plays more
important roles in our ﬁxed-node DMC compared to the rest of nodes which are less likely to be visited in the DMC process, further
explaining why the 3-layer and 4-layer FermiNet-DMC results are so close.
7
Supplementary Table 10/u⎪i007C.varHyperparameters for 4-layer FermiNet for the benenze moledule
Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value
Dimension of one electron layer 256 Dimension of two electron layer 32
Number of layers 4 Number of VMC training steps 106
SupplementaryTable11 /u⎪i007C.varCalculatedbenzeneenergywithFermiNetbasedVMCandDMCinHartree. The3-layerneuralnetworkistrainedwith
2×10 6 steps and the 4-layer one is trained with106 steps. The DMC energy has well converged.
Network Structure FermiNet-VMC FermiNet-DMC
3-layer -232.2143(1) -232.2330(3)
4-layer -232.2233(1) -232.2370(3)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
-4 -2 0 2 4
X (a.u.)
4
2
0
-2
-4 Y (a.u.)
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
204
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
204
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
204
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
log(|Ψ|)
206
208
210
212
214
216
218
log(|Ψ|)
c
e
i
ba d
f g h
j k l
Supplementary Figure 7/u⎪i007C.varThe 2-dimensional slices of log scaled magnitude of wavefunctions for benzene. The ﬁrst and third column of ﬁgures
are for a 4-layer FermiNet and the rest is for a 3-layer FermiNet. Each ﬁgure corresponds to a spin-up electron on a C-H bond, whose position is
indicated by the lightest area in the ﬁgure. The dark pixels correspond to nodes.
8
Supplementary Note 12. Benzene dimer
We use the same 3-layer neural network for the benzene molecule to handle benzene dimers. The network for a benzene dimer is
signiﬁcantlymorediﬃculttotrainthanthebenzenemolecule. Oneofthetrickyhyperparametersisthelearningrate. Smalllearning
rates lead to extremely slow convergence as well as trapping in local minimum, which was also mentioned in Lin et al. [10], while
large learning rates may cause instability or even NaN issues ruining the whole process. In our numerous trials, we found that an
initiallearningrateof0.01withaslightlylargerdecayrate(5000asopposedtothedefault10000)hitsanicebalance. Ittookmillions
of training steps to ﬁnally obtain a converge energy in FermiNet-DMC. In comparison, FermiNet-VMC has not converged even after
fourmillionsteps. OurcalculatedenergyforaT-shapedbenzenedimerwithbondlength4.95ÅislistedinSupplementaryTable12.
The DMC energy of dimers are still higher than the doubled monomer DMC energy by 2 mHa, indicating that a 3-layer network is
too restricted to handle a benzene dimer, which would lead to a bias when estimating binding energies.
Supplementary Table 12/u⎪i007C.varThe ground state energy in Hartree for a T-shaped benzene dimer with bond length 4.95 Å. VMC and DMC results are
based on a FermiNet trained for4×10 6 steps.
Methods Energy ( /u1D438h)
FermiNet-VMC -464.4067(3)
FermiNet-DMC –464.4640(2)
In principle, the binding energy can be accurately determined when the ground state energy of the dimer is calculated using a
suﬃciently large network, which however is beyond the capability of our available computational resource. In order to reduce the
error in estimating the binding energy, we train a separate FermiNet for a conﬁguration with two benzene molecules separated at
10 Å, which we dub as “long-distance”. The training curve is also displayed in Supplementary Fig. 8.a. The calculated binding
energy results, taken as the energy diﬀerence between the long-distance conﬁguration and the equilibrium conﬁguration, are shown
in Fig. 8b. Although FermiNet-DMC improves the convergence and the ﬁnal results of FermiNet-VMC signiﬁcantly, it still shows a
slightoverbindingcomparedwithexperimentalmeasuredrange. Fromtheenergyconvergencepattern,theDMCenergyforthelong-
distanceconﬁgurationconvergesearlierthantheonefortheequilibriumconﬁguration, resultinginanoverly-largebindingenergyas
the energy for equilibrium conﬁguration gets smaller. The reason still lies in the inconsistency of two neural networks in describing
two diﬀerent conﬁgurations. To begin with, a long-distance conﬁguration may be more diﬃcult for FermiNet to handle, especially
whenitsexpressivepowerislimited. Similarphenomenonalsoshowsupin[11]whereDMCenergyistoohighforthelong-distance
conﬁguration due to the limitation of the trial wavefunction. Moreover, the neural networks for diﬀerent conﬁgurations are trained
separately and therefore they may converge to local minima of diﬀerent quality introducing additional bias in the binding energy
calculation.
9
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
VMC training steps ×106
−464.46
−464.42
−464.38Energy (Eh) FermiNet-DMC equilibrium
FermiNet-DMC long-distance
FermiNet-VMC equilibrium
FermiNet-VMC long-distance
2 × Emono
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
VMC training steps ×106
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
ΔE (Eh)
Experiment
FermiNet-DMC
FermiNet-VMC
a b
SupplementaryFigure8 /u⎪i007C.vara. Theenergycurveforbothequilibriumconﬁgurationswithbondlength4.95Åandlong-distanceconﬁgurationswith
bondlength10ÅcalculatedwithFermiNet-VMCandFermiNet-DMC. b. BenzenedimerbindingenergycalculatedwithbothFermiNet-VMCand
FermiNet-DMC. Both results exceed the experimental range while FermiNet-DMC result is closer to the experimental upper limit.
Supplementary Note 13. Binding energy extrapolation
In this note we provide details on the binding energy extrapolation for benzene dimer discussed in main text Section II G.
We ﬁrst show how to ﬁt the slope parameter/u1D464in main text Eq. 1. For a given VMC training process, we do VMC inference and
DMCprocessatasequenceofsteps {/u1D458}andcollectVMCandDMCenergyestimate {/u1D438(/u1D458)
VMC}and{/u1D438(/u1D458)
DMC}. FollowingmaintextEq.
(1), we assume
/u1D438(/u1D458)
DMC−/u1D438ex=/u1D464⋅(/u1D438(/u1D458)
VMC−/u1D438(/u1D458)
DMC)+ /u1D44F+/u1D716(/u1D458) (1)
where/u1D716(/u1D458) corresponds to 0-centered random noise.
A simple manipulation of Supplementary Eq. (1) leads to
/u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
DMC=/u1D464⋅[(/u1D438(/u1D456)
VMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
VMC)−( /u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
DMC)]+( /u1D716(/u1D456)−/u1D716(/u1D457)) ∀/u1D456,/u1D457 (2)
which can be used to ﬁt for slope/u1D464with data{/u1D438(/u1D458)
VMC} and{/u1D438(/u1D458)
DMC} using least squares.
From main text Fig. 5c, we can tell that the slope of ﬁtted line for benzene dimers with diﬀerent bond length are very close.
Therefore we choose to ﬁt a single slope/u1D464with the data from two conﬁgurations combined, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 9.
With the ﬁtted slope/u1D4640, we have extrapolation from Supplementary Eq. (1)
/u1D438ex,s=(1+ /u1D4640) ⋅/u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC,s−/u1D4640 ⋅/u1D438(/u1D456)
VMC,s−/u1D44F−/u1D716(/u1D456)
/u1D460
where/u1D460denotes the bond length for the benzene dimer and can choose value from 4.95 and 10 in this case. Therefore,
Δ/u1D438/u1D452/u1D465=/u1D438ex,10−/u1D438ex,4.95=(1+ /u1D4640) ⋅(/u1D438(/u1D457)
DMC,10−/u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC,4.95)− /u1D4640 ⋅(/u1D438(/u1D457)
VMC,10−/u1D438(/u1D456)
VMC,4.95)−( /u1D716(/u1D457)
10 −/u1D716(/u1D456)
4.95) (3)
Namely, with this scheme, we can get the extrapolated binding energyΔ/u1D438/u1D452/u1D465from energy diﬀerence from any pair of training steps,
modulo the ﬁtting error. And this explains why the distribution of our extrapolated result concentrates so well in main text Fig. 5b.
By averaging the Supplementary Eq. (3) over all chosen steps/u1D456and/u1D457, we signiﬁcantly reduce the ﬁtting error and thus get a much
more accurate binding energy estimate, also shown in main text Fig. 5b.
10
−0.02 −0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02
ΔEVMC − ΔEDMC
−0.02
−0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
ΔEDMC
y = 0.68x
bond length 4.95
bond length 10
Supplementary Figure 9/u⎪i007C.var. For a pair of steps/u1D456and/u1D457in VMC training for benzene dimer, we plot two quantities showing up in Supplementary
Eq. (2), namely[(/u1D438(/u1D456)
VMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
VMC)−( /u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
DMC)] v.s./u1D438(/u1D456)
DMC−/u1D438(/u1D457)
DMC. The data for benzene dimer with bond length 4.95 Å and 10 Å have very
close slope. With those two set of data combined, we ﬁt a straight line with least squares.
Supplementary Note 14. CCSD(T) calculations and their extrapolations
All CCSD(T) results in this paper are obtained with Psi4 [12]. Four-center electron repulsions are approximated with density ﬁtting.
InsteadoftheusualDunningbasissets(cc-pVXZ)forvalence-onlycalculation,weusedDunningbasissets(cc-pCVXZ)forvalence-
core correlations which approximate the exact solution to the all-electron problem. Since the corresponded auxiliary basis set for
cc-pCV5ZisnotavailableinthecurrentversionofPsi4(v1.6),weassignedcc-pV5Z-jkﬁtastheauxiliarybasisforcc-pCV5Zbasis.
For the extrapolation of complete basis set (CBS) limit, we follow the exponential form [13]
/u1D438(/u1D44B)= /u1D438∞+/u1D435/u1D452−/u1D6FC/u1D44B (4)
where/u1D44Bis the cardinal number corresponding to the number of basis functions for each atomic orbital (e.g. 2 for cc-pCVDZ, 3 for
cc-pCVTZ)./u1D438∞istheenergyatCBSlimit. /u1D435and/u1D6FCareparametersneededtoﬁt. Hartree-Fockenergy,CCSDcorrelationenergy,and
(T) contribution are ﬁtted separately using the same formula. Then three extrapolated contributions are added to the CCSD(T)/CBS
result. WedenoteCBS(2-4)andCBS(3-5)astheextrapolationsusingcc-pCVXZ(X=2,3,4),andcc-pCVXZ(X=3,4,5)respectively.
The detailed calculation for benzene is summarized in Table 13.
Supplementary Table 13/u⎪i007C.varExtrapolation of CBS limit for benzene molecule
basis HF CCSD CCSD(T) /u1D438/u1D450/u1D45C/u1D45F/u1D45F(T) contribution
cc-pCVDZ -230.724368 -231.777896 -231.815816 -1.053528 -0.037920
cc-pCVTZ -230.779735 -232.057476 -232.112446 -1.277741 -0.054970
cc-pCVQZ -230.793378 -232.143423 -232.202980 -1.350045 -0.059557
cc-pCV5Z -230.796283 -232.167077 -232.227835 -1.370788 -0.060758
CBS(2-4) -230.797839 -232.243544 -1.384460 -0.061245
CBS(3-5) -230.797069 -232.237386 -1.379133 -0.061184
OurbestestimateofCCSD(T)/CBSforbenzeneis −232.237386Ha,givenbyCBS(3-5). ThediﬀerencebetweenCCSD(T)/CBS(2-
4) and CCSD(T)/CBS(3-5) is about 6 mHa. We expect the extrapolation error of CBS(3-5) for Benzene molecule to be of the order
of 1 mHa. The uncertainty of the extrapolation scheme is mostly contributed by the extrapolation of/u1D438/u1D450/u1D45C/u1D45F/u1D45F. Hartree-Fock energy and
(T) contribution converge fast with respect to the basis set. Their uncertainties (diﬀerence between CBS(2-4) and CBS(3-5)) are less
than 1 mHa, and almost negligible.
For Benzene dimer, the largest basis set we calculated is cc-pCVQZ. Hence, our best result for Benzene dimer is obtained by
CBS(2-4), which gives−464.486530 Ha. We expect the extrapolation error of CBS(2-4) for Benzene dimer is of the order of10
mHa, due to the uncertainty of CBS(2-4) and the doubled system size compared to a single Benzene molecule. We also calculated
CCSD(T)/CBS(2-4) binding energy/u1D438binding = 2× /u1D438mono −/u1D4384.95 where /u1D438mono is the energy of benzene molecule, and/u1D4384.95 is
the energy of benzene dimer at 4.95 Å. The binding energy is calculated for each ﬁnite basis set ﬁrst. Then, they are extrapolated
with Supplementary Eq. (4). The binding energy converges with respect to the basis set much faster than the absolute energy does
(Table 14). The CBS(2-4) estimate for Benzene dimer is2.66 kcal/mol which is already consistent with the existing result [14, 15].
Leveragingthisfact,weareabletocalculatetheBenzenedimerCBS(3-5)resultwithBenzenemonomerCBS(3-5)resultandbinding
energy(2-4)result,whichgives-464.479015Ha. Namely /u1D4384.95 (3−5)=2× /u1D438mono (3−5)−/u1D438binding (2−4). Webelievethisismorereliable
11
Supplementary Table 14/u⎪i007C.varExtrapolation of CBS limit for binding energy of benzene dimer
basis CCSD(T) binding energy
(hartree) (kcal/mol)
cc-pCVDZ 0.004855 3.046686
cc-pCVTZ 0.004659 2.923544
cc-pCVQZ 0.004526 2.839844
CBS(2-4) 0.004243 2.662232
than the CBS(2-4) result and report it in the main text Figure 5a. Here we don’t consider the Basis Set Superposition Error (BSSE)
because the diﬀerence between uncorrected and BSSE-corrected CBS estimates is negligible, according to [14].
12
Supplementary Note 15. Details on the divergence measuring nodal surface diﬀerence
The neighborhood/u1D446/u1D716and mapping/u1D719introduced in main text Section IV F for the wavefunctionΨand nodal surface S is diﬃcult to
compute in practice. Instead we propose easier-to-compute alternatives as approximation.
The major diﬃculty here is that given a point/u1D466and a set/u1D446, it’s hard to ﬁnd the point/u1D467∈/u1D446that is closest to/u1D466. We propose an
approximationasfollows. Notethattheset /u1D446ofourinterestisalwaysanodalsurfaceassociatedwithcertainwavefunction Ψ. Instead
of looking for/u1D467∈/u1D446that is closest to/u1D466, we move/u1D466in the direction in which the value oflog(/u⎪i007C.varΨ/u⎪i007C.var) decreases the fastest, namely we
form the integral curve of the vector ﬁeld−∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ/u⎪i007C.var) starting from/u1D466. And we use the intersection of this integral curve and/u1D446as
the target point/u1D467, signaled by the change of sign ofΨ, and we approximate the distance from/u1D466to/u1D446as
̃/u1D451(/u1D466,/u1D446)= /u1D451(/u1D466,/u1D467)
In other words, we are looking for/u1D467∈/u1D446such that there exists curve/u1D459(/u1D461)satisfying
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
/u1D451/u1D459
/u1D451/u1D461=−∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D459)/u⎪i007C.var)
/u1D459(0)= /u1D466
/u1D459(/u1D4610)= /u1D467∈/u1D446
where/u1D4610 could be an arbitrary number, either positive or negative. Denote the function mapping/u1D466to/u1D467∈ /u1D446as/u1D709, and/u1D709is used as
our practical substitute for function/u1D719mentioned in main text Section IV F looking for the closest point to y in/u1D446. Function /u1D709is
well-deﬁned in the neighbourhood of/u1D446, guaranteed by the local existence and uniqueness of ODE.
Similarly, we propose the alternative of/u1D446/u1D716={/u1D465/u⎪i007C.var/u1D451(/u1D465,/u1D446)</u1D716}as
̃/u1D446/u1D716={/u1D465/u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D465) ⋅Ψ(/u1D465−/u1D716⋅ ∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D465/u⎪i007C.var)
/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D465)/u⎪i007C.var)/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var)<0}
where S is the nodal surface for wavefunctionΨ.
Our algorithm to compute the approximated divergence is in Supplementary Algo. 1.
13
Supplementary Algorithm 1:Divergence for nodal surface diﬀerence pseudocode.
Data: wavefunctionΨ for nodal surface S. wavefunctionΦfor nodal surface T. A batch of walkers (W) following the
distribution of normalizedΨ2. The number of MCMC steps (M) to run in each iteration./u1D716controlling the size of
neighborhood of nodal surfaces./u1D702controlling the discretization of integral curve when moving towards the nodal
surface.
Output: Divergence value D measuring diﬀerence between S and T.
1 Initialize set L as an empty set. ⊳Sample points from/u1D446/u1D716according toΨ2
2 while length(L) < K do
3 for each walker/u1D45F/u1D456in W do
4 Run MCMC procedure from/u1D45F/u1D456for M steps to get a new walker/u1D45E/u1D456.
5 /u1D462/u1D456=/u1D45E/u1D456−/u1D716⋅ ∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D45E/u1D456)/u⎪i007C.var)
/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ(/u1D45E/u1D456)/u⎪i007C.var)/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var
6 ifΨ(/u1D462/u1D456) ⋅Ψ(/u1D45E/u1D456)<0 then
7 Insert/u1D45E/u1D456into L
8 end
9 /u1D45F/u1D456←/u1D45E/u1D456
10 end
11 end
12
13 Initialize set O as an empty set. ⊳Move samples in L closer to node Surface/u1D446ofΨ
14 for each walker in L do
15 Move along the vector ﬁeld∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ/u⎪i007C.var)
/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΨ/u⎪i007C.var)/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.varwith tiny step/u1D702until the sign ofΨ changes
16 /u1D45C/u1D456←the point right before the sign changes
17 Insert/u1D45C/u1D456into O
18 end
19 ⊳Move samples in O closer to node surface/u1D447ofΦ
20 for each walker/u1D45C/u1D456in O do
21 Move along the vector ﬁeld∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΦ/u⎪i007C.var)
/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.var∇log( /u⎪i007C.varΦ/u⎪i007C.var)/u⎪i007C.var/u⎪i007C.varwith tiny step/u1D702until the sign ofΦ changes
22 /u1D45D/u1D456←the point right before the sign changes
23 compute/u1D451(/u1D45C/u1D456,/u1D45D/u1D456)
24 end
25 computeD = Avg(/u1D451(/u1D45C/u1D456,/u1D45D/u1D456))
14
Supplementary References
[1] Richard Needs, Mike Towler, Neil Drummond, and Pablo López Rıos. User’s guide version 2.13 (2019), 2019.
[2] HenrikFlyvbjergandHenrikGordonPetersen. Errorestimatesonaveragesofcorrelateddata. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
91(1):461–466, 1989.
[3] RJ Needs, MD Towler, ND Drummond, Pablo Lopez Rios, and JR Trail. Variational and diﬀusion quantum monte carlo
calculations with the casino code.The Journal of chemical physics, 152(15):154106, 2020.
[4] Andrea Zen, Sandro Sorella, Michael J Gillan, Angelos Michaelides, and Dario Alfe. Boosting the accuracy and speed of
quantum monte carlo: Size consistency and time step.Physical Review B, 93(24):241118, 2016.
[5] D.Pfau,J.S.Spencer,A.G.deG.Matthews,andW.M.C.Foulkes. Ab-initiosolutionofthemany-electronschrödingerequation
with deep neural networks.Phys. Rev. Research, 2:033429, 2020.
[6] James S. Spencer, David Pfau, Aleksandar Botev, and W. M. C. Foulkes. Better, Faster Fermionic Neural Networks.
arXiv:2011.07125 [physics], November 2020. arXiv: 2011.07125.
[7] James Spencer and David Pfau. FermiNet: Fermionic Neural Networks, 2020.
[8] JamesMartensandRogerGrosse. Optimizingneuralnetworkswithkronecker-factoredapproximatecurvature. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 2408–2417. PMLR, 2015.
[9] Aleksandar Botev and James Martens. KFAC-JAX, 2022.
[10] Jeﬀmin Lin, Gil Goldshlager, and Lin Lin. Explicitly antisymmetrized neural network layers for variational monte carlo simu-
lation, 2021.
[11] Arne Lüchow and James B Anderson. Accurate quantum monte carlo calculations for hydrogen ﬂuoride and the ﬂuorine atom.
The Journal of chemical physics, 105(11):4636–4640, 1996.
[12] Daniel G. A. Smith et al. Psi4 1.4: Open-source software for high-throughput quantum chemistry.The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 152(18):184108, 2020.
[13] Asger Halkier, Trygve Helgaker, Poul Jørgensen, Wim Klopper, and Jeppe Olsen. Basis-set convergence of the energy in
molecular hartree–fock calculations.Chemical Physics Letters, 302(5-6):437–446, 1999.
[14] Evangelos Miliordos, Edoardo Aprà, and Sotiris S Xantheas. Benchmark theoretical study of the/u1D70B–/u1D70Bbinding energy in the
benzene dimer.The Journal of Physical Chemistry A , 118(35):7568–7578, 2014.
[15] J.R.Grover,E.A.Walters,andE.T.Hui. Dissociationenergiesofthebenzenedimeranddimercation. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry, 91(12):3233–3237, 1987.
15