 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

           Approximation using Artiﬁcial Neural NetworksQuantum-Inspired Tempering for Ground State


               T. Albash1,2,3*, C. Smith1,3, Q. Campbell3 A. D. Baczewski2,3,4

     1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico,
                                  Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
  2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM
                                            87131, USA
   3 Center for Quantum Information and Control (CQuIC), University of New Mexico,
                                  Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
   4 Quantum Algorithms and Applications Collaboratory, Sandia National Laboratories,
                                  Albuquerque NM 87185, USA
                                        * talbash@unm.edu

                                        February 20, 2023

Abstract

A large body of work has demonstrated that parameterized artiﬁcial neural net-
works  (ANNs)  can  eﬃciently  describe  ground  states  of  numerous  interesting
quantum many-body Hamiltonians. However, the standard variational algorithms
used to update or train the ANN parameters can get trapped in local minima, es-
pecially for frustrated systems and even if the representation is suﬃciently expres-
sive.  We propose a parallel tempering method that facilitates escape from such
local minima.  This methods involves training multiple ANNs independently, with
each simulation governed by a Hamiltonian with a diﬀerent “driver” strength, in
analogy to quantum parallel tempering, and it incorporates an update step into
the training that allows for the exchange of neighboring ANN conﬁgurations.  We
study instances from two classes of Hamiltonians to demonstrate the utility of our
approach using Restricted Boltzmann Machines as our parameterized ANN. The
ﬁrst instance is based on a permutation-invariant Hamiltonian whose landscape
stymies the standard training algorithm by drawing it increasingly to a false local
minimum.  The second instance is four hydrogen atoms arranged in a rectangle,
which  is  an  instance  of  the  second  quantized  electronic  structure  Hamiltonian
discretized using Gaussian basis functions.  We study this problem in a minimal
basis set, which exhibits false minima that can trap the standard variational al-
gorithm despite the problem’s small size.  We show that augmenting the training
with quantum parallel tempering becomes useful to ﬁnding good approximations
to the ground states of these problem instances.


Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                                     2


                                                  1
  SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


2   Overview of the Methodology                                                                         3

3   Results                                                                                                             7
    3.1    Precipice Problem                                                                                                      7
    3.2    H4 Rectangle                                                                                                            10
            3.2.1    Fixed Hamming Weight                                                                                11
            3.2.2    No Fixed Hamming Weight                                                                          12

4   Conclusions                                                                                                    13

5   Code                                                                                                               14

A  Review of Stochastic Reconﬁguration                                                            15

B  Adaptive Learning Rate Scheme                                                                    18

C  Calculating the expectation value of operators with respect to an RBM
    ansatz                                                                                                             19

D  Alternative Parallel Tempering Schemes                                                       21
    D.1   Standard deviation of H2 as a measure of temperature                                          21
    D.2   Almost constant swap probability                                                                            22

E  Short Note On the Bootstrap Procedure                                                       23

F  The H4 rectangle                                                                                            25

References                                                                                                          26




1  Introduction

Approximating the ground state of a many-body quantum Hamiltonian is a computational
task at the heart of many problems in the physical sciences.  Tackling this problem requires
both an eﬃcient representation of the wave function and an algorithm for optimizing the wave
function to minimize its energy whose individual update steps are eﬃcient.  A variety of meth-
ods have been developed, each with its advantages and limitations.  Quantum Monte Carlo
(QMC) [1, 2] methods are generically useful in the absence of the sign problem [3], although
there  are  QMC  approaches  that  try  to  mitigate  the  bottlenecks  associated  with  the  sign
problem [4–6].  Methods based on Matrix Product States (MPS) [7–12] have been extremely
successful at addressing systems in one dimension and methods based on Projected Entangled
Pair States (PEPS) [13,14] have allowed the study of certain systems in two dimensions.  More
recently,  artiﬁcial  neural  networks  (ANNs)  have  been  used  as  ans¨atze  for  quantum  ground
states [15], with the advantages of being agnostic to the sign problem and able to take as input
Hamiltonians with arbitrary connectivity.  While there have been important demonstrations



                                                               2
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


of  the  utility  of  this  approach  [16–18],  it  still  suﬀers  when  studying  frustrated  systems  by
getting stuck in the many local minima of a rugged optimization landscape [19].
    Parallel tempering (PT) [20–22] is a Monte Carlo method that has been extensively used
to help explore the rugged energy landscapes of spin glasses [23].  In the typical PT approach,
multiple “replicas” of the system evolve independently at diﬀerent temperatures and hence
in diﬀerent free energy landscapes.  The exchange of conﬁgurations between higher and lower
temperature replicas facilitates escape from local minima. There is nothing special about using
temperature  to  alter  the  landscape,  and  other  physically  motivated  choices  can  be  made.
In  quantum  parallel  tempering  (QPT)  [24, 25],  replicas  are  evolved  according  to  diﬀerent
Hamiltonians, where the strength of a driver Hamiltonian, e.g.  a uniform transverse ﬁeld, is
used to control the landscape the replicas are evolving in instead of the temperature.
    In this paper we combine the methods of QPT and the training of ANNs to approximate
ground states of quantum spin systems.  For simplicity of presentation, we focus on a speciﬁc
choice of ANN, the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM), and we demonstrate how a QPT
method implemented in addition to the standard training can help overcome barriers in energy
landscape.   We  do  this  using  two  examples.   The  ﬁrst  is  based  on  a  permutation-invariant
Hamiltonian that is designed to trap the standard training approach in a false minimum.  In
this case, the QPT provides a clear advantage over simply repeating the standard algorithm
starting from independent initial points.  The second is based on a molecular system of four
hydrogen atoms arranged in a rectangle with an angleθ between adjacent hydrogen atoms that
we can vary.  The fermionic second quantized Hamiltonian is mapped to a system of qubits
using the Jordan-Wigner transformation [26], and we apply the ANN training methods to the
qubit Hamiltonian [27].  We ﬁnd that the hardness of approximating the ground state of this
system depends on diﬀerent aspects, such as the choice of angles and whether we constrain
the  training to  a  ﬁxed  magnetization  sector corresponding  to  a  ﬁxed particle  number,  and
we ﬁnd that QPT can provide a computational advantage in the cases where the standard
approach struggles to ﬁnd a good approximation of the ground state.
    The paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we review the standard training approach
of  the  RBM  ansatz  for  quantum  wave  functions  in  addition  to  how  we  introduce  QPT  to
it.  In Section 3, we introduce our two problem classes and compare the performance of the
standard training approach to our QPT augmented approach.  In Section 4, we conclude with
open questions and future directions of our work.

2  Overview of the Methodology

We consider an unnormalized parameterized wave function expressed in the computational
basis|ψ(α)⟩ =∑x∈{0,1}nψx(α)|x⟩, where|x⟩≡|xn⟩⊗···⊗|x1⟩ denotes the n-qubit compu-
tational basis state with σzi|xi⟩ = (1− 2xi)|xi⟩ =vi|xi⟩ and α denotes the set of K  complex
variational parameters.  Here we restrict our attention to the case where ψx(α) is the weight
associated with a RBM with parameters α ={ai,bµ,Wiµ}n,mi=1,µ=1 and with x as the value of
its input layer,
                                                      m∏        (        n∑         )
                                           ∑n
                           ψx(α)   = e       i=1aivi      cosh    bµ +      Wiµvi     ,                              (1)
                                                     µ=1                i=1



                                                        3
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


where vi ∈ {−1, 1}.   As  long  as m  scales  polynomially  with n,  the  RBM  representation
provides an eﬃcient representation of the quantum state|ψ(α)⟩.
    Given a many-body HamiltonianH deﬁned onn qubits, our aim is to ﬁnd an approximate
RBM  representation  to  the  ground  state  of H.   Therefore,  our  optimization  problem  is  to
identify a set of parameters α∗ such that
                                       α∗∈ argmin       ⟨ψ(α)|H|ψ(α)⟩
                                                  α       ⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩  .                                             (2)
The cost function on the right hand side deﬁnes a multi-dimensional parameter landscape,
and if the number of variational parameters is suﬃciently large, the global minimum of this
landscape gives an excellent approximation of the ground state.
    This optimization problem is solved using Stochastic Reconﬁguration (SR) [28,29], which
updates the parameters as
                           α′k    = αk +δαk =αk−γ∑                 (S(α))−1kk′Fk′(α) ,                              (3)
                                                               k′
where Skk′(α) are the matrix elements of the covariance matrix and Fk(α) are the elements
of the force vector deﬁned as,
                             Skk′(α) =⟨Ok(α)†Ok′(α)⟩−⟨Ok(α)†⟩⟨Ok′(α)⟩                               (4a)
                               Fk(α) =⟨Ok(α)†H⟩−⟨Ok(α)†⟩⟨H⟩ ,                                           (4b)
where the expectation values are taken with respect to the state|ψ(α)⟩ and where Ok(α) is
the operator associated with the gradient of the state|ψ(α)⟩ with respect to the variational
parameter αk,
                                Ok(α) =  ∑               1      ∂
                                            x={0,1}n  ψx(α)   ∂αkψx(α)|x⟩⟨x| .                                    (5)

Since S may not be invertible, S−1 is strictly speaking the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse [30,
31].  We review the derivations of these formulas in Appendix A.
    The parameter γ sets the learning rate, and we choose it adaptively using a second-order
Runge-Kutta (RK) method [17, 19, 32].  We review this adaptive procedure in Appendix B.
While the RK method incurs a computational overhead because it requires multiple estimates
of the covariance matrix and force vector, the combination of RK with SR generally results in
more accurate results with fewer updates in total compared to other optimization schemes [19]
such  as  ADAM  [33]  with  SR  or  stochastic  gradient  descent,  and  it  eliminates  the  need  to
specify a learning rate.  In this regard, the RK with SR optimization approach to train the
RBM sets a competitive baseline for us to improve upon.
    Calculating  the  covariance  matrix S  and  force  vector F  requires  expectation  values  of
the observables associated with the set{Ok} and H.  These can be estimated using Monte
Carlo importance sampling [15], but in this work we will restrict ourselves to evaluating these
expectation values exactly.  The reason for using exact sampling is to eliminate the role of
ﬁnite sampling in the training.  We give details of how to calculate the necessary expectation
values in Appendix C.
    WithS andF in hand, the ﬁnal step to implement Eq. (3) is to calculate the pseudoinverse
ofS.  In what follows we calculate the inverse using an explicit regularization where we replace
the diagonal elements of S by [15]
                                       Skk→Sregkk  =Skk (1 +λ(p)) ,                                             (6)

                                                         4
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


where p denotes the update step and λ(p) = max (λ0bp,λmin) with λ0 = 100,b = 0.9,λmin =
10−4.   We  use  the  MINRES-QLP  [34]  with  a  maximum  of  103  iterations  and  a  stopping
tolerance of 10−6 to solve the linear system of equations.  The choice of these parameters can
aﬀect the performance of SR to ﬁnd a description of the ground state, and we have not tried
to optimize these parameters for our problem; our aim is to compare the relative performance
of the overall algorithm with and without QPT using the same set of parameters otherwise.
    The  SR  algorithm  can  be  shown  [35]  to  be  a  generalization  of  the  Riemannian  natural
gradient [36], so like other gradient descent algorithms it is susceptible to being trapped in
local minima of the energy landscape.  Finite sampling and the resulting ﬂuctuations inS and
F  can be a source of noise that can help the training escape local minima [37], but it can also
hinder an accurate determination of the gradient and hence prevent the training from ﬁnding
high-quality solutions.  Motivated by the success of PT [20–22] in the study of equilibration in
spin systems, we propose the following optimization algorithm that is inspired by QPT [24,25].
We perform the usual training onN  RBMs, each called a replica in the parlance of PT. Each
training  is  done  with  a  diﬀerent  training  Hamiltonian,  where  the  Hamiltonian  for  the rth
replica is given as
                                             H(Γr) =HT + ΓrHM,                                                   (7)
where HT  is  the  target  Hamiltonian  whose  ground  state  we  are  actually  after  and HM  is
a suitably chosen mixer Hamiltonian with a trivial ground state, preferably the one with a
uniform superposition over the relevant basis states. This choice of training Hamiltonian is not
unique, and we give an alternative formulation in Appendix D. For example, in the absence
of any constraints,  the mixer can be taken to be the uniform transverse ﬁeld Hamiltonian,
HM =−H0∑ni=1  12 (1−σxi ), whereH0 is a characteristic energy scale ofHT.  In this case, for
replicas with Γr≫ 1 the training Hamiltonian is dominated by the transverse ﬁeld, and the
ground state is the uniform superposition state.  This is analogous to the high-temperature
limit in “standard” PT, where the diﬀerent replicas operate at diﬀerent temperatures but with
the same Hamiltonian.  For replicas with Γr close to 0, the training Hamiltonian is dominated
by  the  target  Hamiltonian,  and  the  ground  state  is  close  to  the  target  ground  state.   This
is  analogous  to  the  low-temperature  limit  in  standard  parallel  tempering.   The  parameter
Γr  thus  allows  us  to  interpolate  between  the  target  parameter  landscape  at  Γr  =  0  and  a
much simpler parameter landscape at Γr≫ 1.  We can therefore think of Γr  as controlling
the  eﬀective  temperature  of  the  simulation.   We  note  that  using  Eq.  (7)  as  the  training
Hamiltonian and using Γr  as the temperature is similar to schemes that use the free energy
to train the ANN [18,38,39], where instead of using the entropy we use⟨HT⟩.  We leave it to
future work to directly compare these two approaches.
    We choose our distribution of Γr to be a cubic function of the replica indices,
                                           (  r      )3
                                Γr = 10      N− 1         ,  r = 0,...,N− 1 .                                    (8)

For  our  simulations,  a  ΓN−1  =  10  value  was  suﬃcient  for  the HM  to  dominate  over HT.
We  emphasize  that  the  choice  of  the  distribution  of  Γr  values  can  strongly  inﬂuence  the
performance of the QPT algorithm; for example, choosing a linear function for our simulations
resulted in very poor performance.
    Our  algorithm  proceeds  as  follows.   The N  replicas  (indexed  by r  =  0,...,N− 1)  are
initialized  randomly  with  both  the  real  and  imaginary  components  of  the  parameters αr
chosen from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 10−2.  We perform

                                                          5
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


10 updates of SR for all replicas, conﬁguration swap between replicas r and r + 1 for r even,
10 updates of SR for all replicas, and ﬁnally a conﬁguration swap between replicasr andr +1
for r odd.  The choice of the number of updates of SR between conﬁguration swaps was not
optimized, and other choices may improve performance.  This process is repeated until a total
of u updates are performed.  The deterministic even-odd pattern for conﬁguration swaps is a
typical update pattern in PT that helps improve the diﬀusion of replicas [40, 41].  For every
update, we calculate the expectation value of the target Hamiltonian for each replica, which
we denote by
                                          Er≡⟨ψ(αr)|HT|ψ(αr)⟩ .                                                 (9)
We denote the running average of an expectation value of an observable O over 10 updates
of SR by   ⟨O⟩, which we will use to calculate the probabilities for conﬁguration swaps.
    The ﬁnal issue we must address about the QPT algorithm is how to perform the swap
updates between the N  replicas.  We begin by reminding ourselves how the swaps are per-
formed  in  the  case  where  each  of  the N  replicas  is  evolving  according  to  a  Markov  Chain
Monte Carlo simulation that is ergodic and has a unique equilibrium distribution.  Assuming
a ﬁnite state space, thei-th conﬁguration of replicar has an equilibrium probability given by
Π(Γr) =Wi(Γr)/∑jWj(Γr), where Wi(Γr) is the unnormalized weight of the i-th conﬁgura-
tion.  The swap updates between replicas then occurs with a probability p chosen to satisfy
the detailed balance condition; speciﬁcally, if replica r is in conﬁguration i and replica r + 1
is in conﬁguration i′, then the probability of a swap between the two is taken to be:
                                                   (                          )
                                 pr↔r+1 = min        1,Wi(Γr+1)Wi′(Γr)Wi(Γr)Wi′(Γr+1).                                    (10)

While we may think of the SR algorithm as implementing imaginary-time evolution in a ﬁxed
subspace (see Appendix A), we are not aware of a way to implement this evolution in terms
of  an  ergodic  MCMC  simulation  that  eventually  converges  to  an  equilibrium  distribution.
Therefore  we  are  not  able  to  use  the  form  in  Eq.  (10),  and  instead  we  will  use  physical
intuition to pick a swap update probability.  This choice is not unique, and we expect diﬀerent
choices to perform diﬀerently.
    With these concerns in mind, we propose the following update.  For Γr  = 0(r = 0), we
expect the ANN to reach a good approximation of an eigenstate ofHT, assuming the number
ANN  parameters  is  suﬃciently  large  and  the  ANN  is  suﬃciently  expressive.   Similarly,  for
replicas with Γr≫ 1 we expect the ANN to be a good approximation of an eigenstate ofHM.
Therefore, as we have already mentioned, we can think of Γr as being a measure of a “noise”
introduced, and we can think of Γr  as being proportional to the temperature of the replica.
We thus propose the following probability rule for swap updates between neighboring pairs r
and r + 1:                           (         [(                                       )])
                    pr↔r+1 = min        1, exp    Er−    Er+1)(    1H0Γr−      1H0Γr+1         .                   (11)

This  choice  for  the  probability  rule  is  a  heuristic  choice  motivated  by  the  Metropolis  up-
date [42] for the standard PT algorithm [20–22], but in no way do we claim that it satisﬁes
detailed balance [43].  The use of the target energy comes from the desire to move conﬁgura-
tions with lower target energies to smaller r.  For our temperature, we use Γr  multiplied by
some relevant energy scale H0 as motivated by our discussion above.  We use                       Er  as opposed
to simply Er  in order to average out any ﬂuctuations in the estimation of the target energy
during the ANN training.

                                                         6
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


    In what follows, we deﬁne success as ﬁnding a conﬁguration below some relative error ϵ of
the energy given by                                ⏐⏐⏐⏐           ⏐⏐⏐⏐ ,                                                    (12)
                                              ϵ =    ⟨E⟩−EGS
                                                         EGS
whereEGS is the true ground state energy.  To determine whether QPT can provide practical
advantages over its standard counterpart,  we use the time-to-epsilon (TTϵ) metric [44, 45],
which is the time required to ﬁnd a solution below a target relative error ϵ at least once with
probability 0.99.  The TTϵ is given by

                                        TTϵ =  NNmaxu ln(1− 0.99)ln(1−pS(u)) ,                                            (13)

where pS(u) is the probability of reaching the target ϵ within u steps of the algorithms, such
that the factor   ln(1−0.99)ln(1−pS(u))  counts the number of repetitions of the algorithm needed to ensure
the  target ϵ  is  reached  with  probability  0.99  at  least  once. Nmax  is  the  largest  number  of
QPT replicas we will use in our simulations, so that the factor N/Nmax  takes into account
the reduction in computational cost possible by parallelization by exchanging replicas N with
independent runs of the algorithm.  For every pair of values (n,N), we identify the value of u
that minimizes the TTϵ, and we choose this as the cost of running the algorithm.  Using this
approach we can determine unambiguously when it becomes more advantageous to use QPT
versus independent runs of the algorithm.  We emphasize that this metric does not account for
the extra overhead associated with the communication needed between replicas to implement
the swap update, but we expect this to be minimal compared to the cost of ﬁnding a high
quality solution for hard problems.

3  Results

3.1Precipice Problem
In order to illustrate the computational viability of the QPT approach, we study a problem
class of qubit Hamiltonians that are invariant under any permutation of the qubits.  Speciﬁ-
cally, we take our target Hamiltonian to be of the form

                                               n∑
                          HT = 12(1−s)            (1−σxi ) +s ∑
                                             i=1                  x∈{0,1}nf(x)|x⟩⟨x| ,                           (14)

wheren is the total number of qubits andf(x) is a function that only depends on the Hamming
weight of the bit-string x.  We can therefore label the energy eigenstates of HT  in terms of
their symmetry properties under qubit permutation.  We take the mixer Hamiltonian to be
given by the uniform transverse ﬁeld Hamiltonian,

                                                           n∑
                                          HM =−H02            (1−σxi ),                                               (15)
                                                          i=1
which is also qubit permutation invariant and we set H0  = 1.  Because the Hamiltonian is
stoquastic [46, 47], the ground state of this Hamiltonian can be expressed entirely with non-
negative amplitudes, so it must be in the completely symmetric subspace, which has dimension

                                                         7
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


n + 1.  We can enforce this symmetry in our RBM ansatz
                                                       m∏        (             n∑    )
                            ψx(α)   = ea∑ni=1vi            cosh    bµ +Wµ          vi   ,                             (16)
                                                      µ=1                     i=1

where vi ≡  (1− 2xi)∈{−1, 1}.   This  ansatz  only  depends  on  the  total  magnetization  of
the  spin conﬁguration v,  or  equivalently  on the  Hamming  weight  of the  bit-string x.  This
will enforce that all equal Hamming weight bit-strings will have the same amplitude.  This
representation  has  only K  =  1 + 2m  parameters.   In  principle  these  parameters  need  only
be purely real to capture the ground state, but we will allow the training to treat them as
complex parameters.
    In what follows, we will focus on a function f(x) ﬁrst introduced in Ref. [48]
                                                {−1      if x = 1··· 1
                                       f(x) =       w(x)   otherwise ,                                               (17)

where w(x)  denotes  the  Hamming  weight  of  the  bit-string x.   We  call  this  problem  the
“Precipice” problem because of the form of f(x),  since it increases linearly with Hamming
weight until reaching Hamming weight n where it plummets to a value of−1.
    For concreteness, we picks = 4/5 for our target Hamiltonian in Eq. (14).  For this value of
s,HT  is dominated by its diagonal component, corresponding to the second term in Eq. (14).
The  ground  state  of  the  corresponding  target  Hamiltonian HT  has  most  but  not  all  of  its
weight on the all-one bit-string,  which is the bit-string that minimizes f(x).  On the other
hand, the ﬁrst excited state of HT has most of its weight on the false minimum of f(x) given
by the all-zero bit-string.  The Hamiltonian HT has the feature that annealing from Γ≫ 1 to
Γ = 0 (Eq. (7)) encounters an exponentially closing ground state energy gap as a function of
the system size.  One can understand this intuitively as arising from the system requiring to
tunnel between the two conﬁgurations above (the state with most of its weight on the all-one
bit string and the state with most of its weight on the all-zero bit string) that requires ﬂipping
n spins [49].
    This feature of the energy spectrum stymies the SR algorithm.  Whether it will ﬁnd the
the correct global minimum depends entirely on where the RBM parameters are initialized,
because  once  it  reaches  the  false  minimum  associated  with  the  ﬁrst  excited  state,  the  SR
updates do not provide a means to escape this local minimum and reach the global minimum.
This is where our QPT implementation helps, as it provides a mechanism for RBM conﬁgu-
rations with weight on the all-one bit-string to be reached and guide the training to the true
ground state.  Since our aim is to distinguish between the two minima that the algorithm can
get stuck in, the choice of ϵ is not crucial as long as it is suﬃciently small.  We therefore ﬁx
it to ϵ = 10−1, which is enough to distinguish between the two lowest energy eigenstates.
    We begin by analyzing the behavior of the standard algorithm without QPT. We show in
Fig. 1 how the probability of ﬁnding the ground state within a relative error of ϵ behaves as
a function of system size.  We see that the probability of ﬁnding the ground state saturates
to a value less than 1 as a function of the number of SR updates, and the saturation value
decreases faster than exponentially with system size.  This behavior indicates that once the
system reaches the false minimum it is trapped there without the possibility of escape, and the
probability of initializing at a point where the SR updates guide you to the correct minimum
decays faster than exponentially.


                                                         8
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission





















                           (a)                                                      (b)

     Figure 1:  Relative frequency of ﬁnding the ground state for the Precipice problem
     to within a relative error ofϵ = 0.1 for a random initialization of a trial RBM ansatz
     without using QPT as a function of (a) number of updates and (b) system size n.
     We used 103  independent trials for n = 6, 7, 8,  4× 103  for n = 9 and 4× 104  for
     n = 10.  The error bars correspond to the 95% conﬁdence interval calculated using a
     bootstrap with 103 resamplings of the data.  We describe this procedure in Appendix
     E. Inset:  Median number of updates to reach a relative error of ϵ = 0.1 when the
     algorithm succeeds.


    To show how QPT boosts the probability of ﬁnding the ground state, we show in Fig. 2
how  with  increasing  number  of  updates  in  QPT  we  can  increase  the  probability  of  ﬁnding
the ground state.  In order to compare these results to the standard approach without QPT,
we use the results at n = 10 as a benchmark.  In the standard approach, the probability of
ﬁnding the ground state is approximately 2.5× 10−3  with a median number of steps of 440
(Fig. 1).  Therefore, to guarantee that we ﬁnd the ground state at least once with probability
0.99, we would need to perform 1840 independent trials.  With QPT, we can achieve almost
a probability of 1 of ﬁnding the ground state using less than 500 steps and 10 replicas with
a single simulation.  Therefore, we already see a signiﬁcant advantage for using QPT in this
model.
    To illustrate how the QPT algorithm is helping, we show in Fig. 3 an example of a random
walk for one of our simulation trials.  In Fig. 3a, we see that both replicas at r = 0 andr = 1
very quickly converge to the ﬁrst excited state and only after approximately 1500 network
updates does ther = 0 replica ﬁnd the ground state.  As we can see in Fig. 3b, the transition
to the ground state is precipitated by a swap between the r = 0 and r = 1 conﬁgurations.
While the conﬁguration atr = 0 remains unchanged for a large fraction of the earlier updates,
the conﬁguration atr = 1 is swapped multiple times with other conﬁgurations, allowing it to
explore the landscape of possible solutions.
    Finally, we show our results for the TTϵ in Fig. 4 with Nmax = 40.  We see that at small
system sizes (< 8), using the standard approach (N = 1) is more advantageous than incurring
the added computational cost of QPT. Here the probability of reaching the ground state is
suﬃciently high (even if it is not close to 1 as seen in Fig. 1) that running multiple independent
runs of the algorithm is the optimal strategy.  However beyond system sizes of > 8, we see


                                                        9
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure 2:  Relative frequency of ﬁnding the ground state for the Precipice problem
     to within ϵ = 10−1  with increasing number of updates in QPT for 50 independent
     simulations.  Here we use N = 10 replicas for all QPT simulations.


a signiﬁcant advantage to using QPT. In this case, the optimal strategy is to use QPT with
more updates to achieve higher probabilities of reaching the ground state.
    We  note  that  for  intermediate  values  of n  we  see  similar  performance  for N  =  10  and
N  =  20,  indicating  that  increasing  the  number  of  replicas  does  not  improve  the  success
probability enough to outweigh the cost of simulating additional replicas.  However, we also
see that at larger system sizes it does become more advantageous to use more replicas.  For
example, atn = 17 our simulations withN = 10 replicas fail to ﬁnd the ground state, and at
n = 18 our simulations withN = 20 replicas fail to ﬁnd the ground state.  Because increasing
N  changes the distribution of Γr  values and includes more replicas at smaller Γr  values, the
need to increaseN to ﬁnd the ground state at larger system sizes indicates the importance of
optimizing this distribution to get the best results.

3.2H       4 Rectangle
The  second  system  we  study  is  that  of  four  hydrogen  atoms  arranged  in  a  rectangle  with
an angle θ between adjacent atoms.  This is an example of a molecular system that is small
enough  to  be  exactly  solved  that  includes  a  type  of  conﬁgurational  degeneracy  that  gives
some approximate quantum chemistry algorithms trouble [50, 51].  We consider a particular
encoding  of  the  second  quantized  Hamiltonian  into  8  qubits;  further  details  of  this  system
and how we construct the qubit Hamiltonian are given in Appendix F.
    The  ground  state  of  the  8-qubit  Hamiltonian  has  non-zero  amplitudes  only  on  compu-
tational basis states with Hamming Weight four or equivalently with four fermions or zero
z-magnetization.  This observation motivates two diﬀerent RBM ans¨atze:  (1) we restrict the
input of the RBM to Hamming-weight-four computational basis states and assume that all
other inputs give zero amplitude, and (2) we allow all inputs to the RBM and the training
of  the  RBM  must  ﬁnd  the  Hamming  weight-four  subspace.   While  the  ﬁrst  case  is  a  more
eﬃcient representation for the H4 Rectangle, we still consider both ans¨atze since they could
be relevant in diﬀerent contexts for fermionic simulation beyond the H4 Rectangle:  the ﬁrst
applies to cases where particle number is conserved, whereas the second applies to cases where
the chemical potential is ﬁxed.


                                                         10
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission





















                           (a)                                                       (b)

     Figure  3:  An  example  of  a  random  walk  for  a  single  simulation  of  the  Precipice
     problem withn = 12 andN = 10.  In (a), we show the target energy (Eq. (9)) of the
     conﬁguration atr = 0 andr = 1 during the simulation.  The dotted lines correspond
     to the ground state energy and ﬁrst excited state energy for the target Hamiltonian.
     In (b), we label each conﬁguration by its original replica index at initialization, and
     we show which index is at position r  = 0 and r  = 1 during the simulation.  This
     allows us to monitor how conﬁgurations walk on the space of Γr.


    In what follows, we ﬁx our desired error toϵ = 10−3.  The reason for this smaller choice of
relative error, compared to the Precipice example, is that this problem requires a relative error
less than 6×10−3 forθ = 90◦ to begin distinguishing the two lowest energy eigenstates.  So we
choose anϵ that is suﬃciently small to ensure that we are ﬁnding a high quality approximation
of the ground state.  For the simulations, we use a up to 104 updates.

3.2.1Fixed Hamming Weight
We ﬁrst consider the case where the RBM is only sampled with Hamming-weight-four states.
In  this  case,  we  choose  a  mixer  Hamiltonian  given  by  the  ferromagnetic  Heisenberg  model
with all-to-all connectivity,

                                          n∑   n∑   (                               )
                           HM = H02n                  1−σxiσxj−σyiσyj−σziσzj           ,                            (18)
                                         i=1 j=i+1

for which the (degenerate) ground state is the uniform superposition of ﬁxed Hamming weight
states with energy 0 andH0 is the absolute magnitude of the largest coupling strength in the
target Hamiltonian.  This choice is made to ensure that the energy scales of HM and HT are
comparable.
    For the simulations, we ﬁnd that using m = 8 hidden units is suﬃcient to represent the
ground state with the required accuracy, so we use this value for all our training simulations
with a ﬁxed Hamming weight exact sampling.  We show in Fig. 5 the results for the optimal
TTϵ for three diﬀerent θ values, where we ﬁnd rich behavior as a function of θ.  We ﬁnd that
for a suﬃcient number of replicas,  the QPT approach demonstrates an advantage over the
standard approach for angles θ = 80◦ and 85◦.  Forθ = 90◦, the ground state is found readily

                                                        11
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure  4:  Optimum  time  to  epsilon  to  reach  a  relative  error  of ϵ  =  10−1  for  the
     Precipice  problem  as  a  function  of  system  size n  for  the  Precipice  problem  with
     diﬀerent number of QPT replicas N  with Nmax  = 40.  The error bars correspond
     to the 95% conﬁdence interval calculated using a bootstrap with 103 resamplings of
     the data.


by the standard approach that the additional cost of running N  replicas does not introduce
any  beneﬁt.   The θ  =  90◦  instance  was  found  to  be  pathological  for  the  coupled  cluster
doubles (CCD) approximation but not its variational counterpart in Ref. [51].  It is therefore
unsurprising that a variational RBM ansatz that explores a similar Hilbert space captures the
ground state well.  Because the root of the CCD pathology is ultimately degeneracy of two
of the dominant conﬁgurations, it seems like this degeneracy might provide an advantage for
the RBM ansatz training that is worthy of further investigation.
    We also note that this particular radius provides a uniquely easy energy landscape for the
single-replica approach at 90◦,  and at diﬀerent radii the 90◦  case is more diﬃcult.  In fact,
among the instances considered,  the instance that we are highlighting was found to be the
one for which achieving an advantage with QPT was most diﬃcult.  At θ = 80◦ and 85◦, we
observe  that N  =  5, N  =  10  and N  =  20  replicas  exhibit  a  deﬁnitive  advantage  over  the
single-replica approach.

3.2.2No Fixed Hamming Weight
We now consider the case where the RBM is sampled with all possible computational basis
states.  In this case, we choose a mixer Hamiltonian to be the uniform transverse ﬁeld:
                                                          n∑
                                           HM = H02           (1−σxi ) ,                                               (19)
                                                         i=1
where H0  is  again  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  largest  coupling  strength  in  the  target
Hamiltonian.
    For the simulations, we ﬁnd that using m = 48 hidden units is suﬃcient to represent the
ground state with the required accuracy but also allow the simulations withN = 1 to ﬁnd the
ground state with suﬃcient frequency, so we use this value for these simulations1.  We show in

   1We can actually use fewer hidden units (as low as m = 16) and still have an approximation of the ground
state to the desired accuracy, but in this case we only ﬁnd a good approximation to the ground state using our
QPT method when using our simulation parameters.

                                                          12
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure 5:  Optimum time to epsilon to reach a relative error of ϵ = 10−3 for the H4
     Rectangle at diﬀerent angles with ﬁxed Hamming weight exact sampling.  We use
     Nmax  =  20.   The  error  bars  correspond  to  the  95%  conﬁdence  interval  calculated
     using a bootstrap with 103 resamplings of the data.  The lines are to guide the eye.


Fig. 6 the results for the optimal TTϵ for the same three values of θ∈{80◦, 85◦, 90◦}.  While
generally the problem of approximating the ground state is harder in this case compared to
the ﬁxed Hamming weight case, the advantage for QPT training with a suﬃcient number of
replicas for all three angles is clear, indicating that the energy landscape is more eﬃciently
searched using the QPT training in this case.  This is a promising indication of the advantages
of the QPT approach for more generic problems that may not exhibit any symmetries that
can be used to restrict the wave function ans¨atze.

4  Conclusions

We have shown that using a QPT method as part of the training of ANNs to approximate
ground states of quantum Hamiltonians can help overcome barriers in the energy landscape.
To illustrate this, we simplify our analysis by using exact sampling in order to eliminate the
role of ﬂuctuations introduced by ﬁnite sampling.  We demonstrated the utility of the QPT
approach using two Hamiltonians with very diﬀerent proﬁles.  For the permutation invariant
problem, the QPT approach demonstrated a clear advantage over repetitions of the standard
algorithm even for small system sizes. A possible criticism of this problem is that it is described
by a stoquastic Hamiltonian [46,47].  Stoquastic Hamiltonians have ground state that can be
described  in  terms  of  non-negative  real  amplitudes,  and  they  admit  eﬃcient  quantum-to-
classical mappings [52].  While these properties do not necessarily mean there is an eﬃcient
algorithm to ﬁnd the ground state, the existence of an eﬃcient classical representation is often
taken to mean that the ground states of stoquastic Hamiltonians are not as diﬃcult to ﬁnd
as those of non-stoquastic Hamiltonians.  We therefore consider a second problem based on
four hydrogen atoms arranged in a rectangle with a variable angle between adjacent atoms,
and we observe a clear advantage for the QPT approach at some angles where the standard
approach  struggled  to  ﬁnd  the  ground  state.   These  promising  initial  results  indicate  that
using the QPT approach to train ANNs may be useful for a broad range of Hamiltonians with
diﬃcult to explore parameter landscapes.


                                                        13
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure  6:  Optimum  time  to  epsilon  to  reach  a  relative  error  of ϵ  =  10−3  for  the
     H4 Rectangle at diﬀerent angles with full exact sampling.  We use Nmax = 20.  The
     error bars correspond to the 95% conﬁdence interval calculated using a bootstrap
     with 103 resamplings of the data.  The lines are to guide the eye.


    We focused on using an RBM as our ANN ansatz, but the implementation of QPT is in-
dependent of the choice of ANN architecture and can be applied equally well to convolutional
neural  networks  (CNNs)  [16],  to  two  disconnected  real  ANNs  to  represent  the  magnitude
and phase of wave function amplitudes [19], or to group convolutional neural networks (GC-
NNs) [18], which have also been shown to be eﬃcient at representing quantum states.  This
makes  our  proposed  approach  quite  versatile,  with  only  the  added  complexity  of  training
multiple replicas of the ANNs and implementing conﬁguration swaps between them.
    We emphasize that we made several choices in this work for simplicity that might have
been suboptimal for the performance of the QPT approach.  For example, we chose a cubic
distribution of the parameter Γ for our replicas (Eq. (8)), and a suboptimal distribution of Γ
values around a bottleneck for the simulation does hinder the random walk of replicas [53].
We conjecture that optimizing this distribution will further increase the advantage of the QPT
approach in our problems.  We leave it to future work to develop a methodology to identify
more optimal distributions.
    Furthermore, our choice of swap probability (Eq. (11)) was based on an intuitive argument,
and we provided examples of other possible choices in Appendix D. It would be ideal to identify
a choice that can satisfy some appropriate notion of detailed balance.  We believe that this
is the most important open theoretical problem with our proposal.  Such a formalism would
also allow us to adopt some of the strategies and methods using in conjunction with QPT
to characterize the hardness of the landscape, such as using the autocorrelation time of the
replica random walk as a proxy for the mixing time [23].

5  Code

Code for this project can be found at https://github.com/talbash/QPTforRBM.






                                                        14
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the UNM Center for Advanced Research Computing, supported in part
by the National Science Foundation, for providing the high performance computing resources
used in this work.

Funding information    This material is based upon work supported by the National Sci-
ence  Foundation  under  Grant  No.   2037755.   This  material  is  based  upon  work  supported
by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research under award number FA9550-22-1-0498.  Any
opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the United States Air Force.  CS
and QC were supported by Sandia National Laboratories’ Laboratory Directed Research and
Development program (Project 222396).  Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission lab-
oratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia,
LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for DOE’s National Nuclear
Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525.  This paper describes objective tech-
nical results and analysis.  Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the
paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United
States Government.

A Review of Stochastic Reconﬁguration

We  consider  a  (possibly  unnormalized)  wave  function|ψ(α)⟩  parameterized  by K  complex
parameters denoted byα = (α1,...,αK)T .  We are interested in ﬁnding the parameter values
α that minimize
                                     E(α)≡⟨ψ(α)|H|ψ(α)⟩⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩    =⟨H⟩ .                                          (20)

The true minimum is given by the ground state energyEGS.  Because the parameterization of
the wave function|ψ(α)⟩ is unlikely to be general enough to capture the ground state exactly,
we can only hope for|ψ(α)⟩ (when normalized) to provide an approximation to the ground
state.
    Assume the wave function has an expansion in a basis of the form:|ψ(α)⟩ =∑xψx(α)|x⟩.
For simplicity, we will assume thatψx(α) only depends onαk and not on both (αk,α∗k).  Let us
consider a small variation of the parameters α′k =αk +δαk Let us expand the wave function:

                      |ψ(α′)⟩   = |ψ(α)⟩       (    1                )
                              +∑     δαk  ∑               ∂            ψx(α)|x⟩

                                  k        x     ψx(α)   ∂αkψx(α)
                                   ∑             (    1      ∂     ∂          )
                              +12      δαkδαk′      ψx(α)  ∂αk   ∂αk′ψx(α)      ψx(α)|x⟩
                                   k,k′
                              +.....                                                                                          (21)





                                                       15
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


It is convenient to deﬁne the operators:

                                  Ok(α) =∑            1      ∂
                                               x   ψx(α)   ∂αkψx(α)|x⟩⟨x| ,                                      (22a)
                               Mkk′(α) =∑             1      ∂     ∂
                                               x   ψx(α)   ∂αk   ∂αk′ψx(α)|x⟩⟨x| .                              (22b)

(We will suppress their α dependence for notational brevity) such that we can write

                          |ψ(α′)⟩   = |ψ(α)⟩ +∑             δαkOk|ψ(α)⟩
                                                        k
                                                ∑
                                           +12       δαkδαk′Mkk′|ψ(α)⟩ +...
                                           (    k,k′                     )

                                      =      1 +∑      δαk⟨Ok⟩ +...         |ψ(α)⟩
                                                    k
                                           +∑δαk (Ok−⟨Ok⟩)|ψ(α)⟩
                                               k
                                                ∑
                                           +12       δαkδαk′ (Mkk′−⟨Mkk′⟩)|ψ(α)⟩
                                                k,k′
                                           +... ,                                                                            (23)

where

                                       ⟨Ok(α)⟩ =⟨ψ(α)|Ok(α)|ψ(α)⟩⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩   ,                                        (24a)

                                    ⟨Mkk′(α)⟩ =⟨ψ(α)|Mkk′(α)|ψ(α)⟩⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩    .                                     (24b)

We will denote the coeﬃcient of the|ψ(α)⟩ term in Eq. (23) byδα0, such that⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α′)⟩ =
δα0⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩ and

                      ⟨ψ(α′)|ψ(α′)⟩   = |δα0|2⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩(           )
                            +∑     δα∗kδαk′⟨ψ(α)|       O†k−⟨O†k⟩      (Ok′−⟨Ok′⟩)|ψ(α)⟩
                               k,k′
                            +...                                                   
                            =|δα0|2    1 +     1      ∑    δα∗kδαk′Sk,k′ +...      
                                               |δα0|2  k,k′
                            ×⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩ ,                                                                                  (25)

where we have deﬁned the covariance matrix
                                                 (              )
                                        ⟨ψ(α)|     O†k−⟨O†k⟩      (Ok′−⟨Ok′⟩)|ψ(α)⟩
                           Skk′    =                      ⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩

                                   = ⟨O†kOk′⟩−⟨O†k⟩⟨Ok′⟩ .                                                        (26)

                                                          16
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


Here we have suppressed the dependence ofS onα.  We see from Eq. (25) that renormalizing
|ψ(α′)⟩ by δα0 amounts to rescaling δαk by δα0.  We will exploit this freedom later.  Finally,
for completeness, we note that we can expand the energy as:

                     E(α′)   = E(α)                 (              (              )
                                               ∑
                             +         1⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩   δα∗k⟨ψ(α)|     O†k−⟨O†k⟩      H|ψ(α)⟩
                                                 k
                             +δαk⟨ψ(α)|H (Ok−⟨Ok⟩)|ψ(α)⟩) +... ,
                               = E(α) +∑           (δα∗kFk +δαkF∗k ) +... ,                                      (27)
                                                k
where we have deﬁned                            (              )

                                       ⟨ψ(α)|     O†k−⟨O†k⟩      (H−E(α))|ψ(α)⟩
                            Fk    =                     ⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩

                                  = ⟨O†kH⟩−⟨O†k⟩⟨H⟩ .                                                            (28)

Here we have suppressed the dependence of F  on α.
    For the SR algorithm we further demand that:

                                        |ψ(α′)⟩ =P (Λ−H)|ψ(α)⟩ ,                                            (29)

where Λ is taken to be a suﬃciently large (larger than the largest eigenvalue of H) positive
number and P  is the projector onto the subspace of the parameterization.  By acting with()
⟨ψ(α)| and⟨ψ(α)|        O†k−⟨O†k⟩      , and by restricting to linear order in δα, we get K + 1 linear
equations:

                          ∑δα0 = Λ−E(α)                                                                          (30a)()
                               δαk′⟨ψ(α)|      O†k−⟨O†k⟩      (Ok′−⟨Ok′⟩)|ψ(α)⟩ =
                            k′                (              )
                                   −⟨ψ(α)|      O†k−⟨O†k⟩      H|ψ(α)⟩
                                             (              )
                               =−⟨ψ(α)|        O†k−⟨O†k⟩      (H−E(α))|ψ(α)⟩ ,                             (30b)

we get the linear equation:

                              −Fk =∑         Skk′δαk′⇒δαk =−∑S−1kk′Fk′ .                                (31)
                                         k′                             k′
Since S  may  not  be  invertible, S−1  is  strictly  speaking  the  Moore-Penrose  pseudoinverse.
Therefore, the update rule for the parameters α is given by:

                                    α′k =αk +δαk =αk−∑                S−1kk′Fk′ .                                       (32)
                                                                  k′
Furthermore, if we renormalize the stateψ(α′) byδα0, we eﬀectively are rescalingδαk byδα0.
Therefore, our update rule after this renormalization is given by:
                                                                    ∑
                                 α′k =αk + δαkδα0  =αk−   1δα0           S−1kk′Fk′ ,                                   (33)
                                                                     k′

                                                         17
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


and we have (from Eq. (25)):

                              ⟨ψ(α′)|ψ(α′)⟩−⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩
                                         ⟨ψ(α)|ψ(α)⟩                =
                                                       1     ∑    δα∗ksk,k′δαk′ +... .                              (34)
                                                    |δα0|2   k,k′

    By repeating this iterative scheme, convergence is reached when the ratio δαk/δα0→ 0:
we have from Eq. (27):

                           E(α′)−E(α) =∑       (
                               −    1|δα0|2      F∗kS−1kk′Fk′ +(F∗kS−1kk′Fk′)∗)       .                                   (35)
                                           k,k′

Because  the  covariance  matrix  is  a  positive  semi-deﬁnite  matrix,  the  term  in  the  sum  is
positive, which says that on every iteration the energy decreases, and in the limit ofδαk/δα0→
0, the energy ceases to change.
    As we noted earlier,  there is some freedom in picking the value of Λ.  Since Λ controls
the value of δαk, which in turn controls both the parameter update rate (Eq. (33)) and the
wave function change rate (Eq. (34)), in practice we treat δα−10 ≡γ as a free parameter that
is chosen to get a stable convergence.  The value of γ is the learning rate.  As we describe in
Appendix B, we will use an adaptive scheme to update this learning rate.
    In  the  case  of  the  RBM  ansatz,  the  operators Ok  can  be  calculated  analytically.   The
relevant quantities are given by:

                                      1      ∂
                                   ψx(α)   ∂aiψx(α) = (1− 2xi) ,                                                 (36a)
                                      1      ∂
                                   ψx(α)   ∂bµψx(α) = tanh (θ(x)) ,                                             (36b)
                                    1      ∂
                                ψx(α)    ∂Wiµψx(α) = (1− 2xi) tanh (θ(x)) .                               (36c)

B Adaptive Learning Rate Scheme

We begin by interpreting Eq. (3) as being a discretization of a dynamical equation for α with
γ being the step size; therefore, let us recast it as:

                          d                    (S(α(γ))−1)kk′Fk′(α(γ))≡fk(α(γ)) ,                        (37)
                         dγαk(γ) =−∑k′

where we have introduced the dependence of α onγ.  In this form, we can use a Heun second
order consistent integrator to adaptively update γ.  We calculate two quantities:

                                             ⃗κ1 = ⃗f(⃗α(γ)) ,                                                            (38a)
                                             ⃗κ2 = ⃗f(⃗α(γ) + ∆γ⃗κ1) ,                                               (38b)



                                                           18
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


and then update using:
                                      ⃗α(γ + ∆γ) =⃗α(γ) + ∆γ2   (⃗κ1 +⃗κ2)                                        (39)
In order to dynamically adjust the step ∆γ, we calculate the ANN parameters at the same
time γ + ∆γ but now using two ∆γ/2 steps.  Therefore, we deﬁne:

                                  ⃗κ3 = ⃗f(⃗α(γ) + ∆γ2 ⃗κ1) ,                                                           (40a)

                                  ⃗κ4 = ⃗f(⃗α(γ) + ∆γ4   (⃗κ1 + ⃗κ3)) ,                                                (40b)

                                  ⃗κ5 = ⃗f(⃗α(γ) + ∆γ4   (⃗κ1 + ⃗κ3) + ∆γ2 ⃗κ4) ,                                  (40c)

such that
                          ⃗α′(γ + ∆γ) =⃗α(γ) + ∆γ4   (⃗κ1 + ⃗κ3) + ∆γ4   (⃗κ4 +⃗κ5) .                         (41)

We deﬁne ∆α =‖⃗α′(γ + ∆γ)−⃗α(γ + ∆γ)‖S(α(γ)), where the norm here is deﬁned as:
                                                      vuu√
                                                           M∑
                                 ‖⃗x‖S(α(γ)) =  1M              x∗kSkk′(α(γ))xk′ .                                  (42)
                                                         k,k′=1
The adjusted time step is then taken to be [17]:
                                                           ( 6ϵ   )1/3
                                             ∆γ′ = ∆γ         ∆α          ,                                                 (43)

for a ﬁxed tolerance ϵ.  In our simulations, we ﬁx ϵ = 10−6.  We note that in a single update
step in this framework requires performing 5 diﬀerent calculations of S  and F , one for each
of the diﬀerent κ values.

C Calculating the expectation value of operators with respect
       to an RBM ansatz

We begin by ﬁrst considering a diagonal operator D, meaning it is diagonal in the compu-
tational basis.  In this case,  the expectation value of the operator can be straightforwardly
calculated using the RBM ansatz in Eq. (1) (we will suppress the α dependence):
                                        ⟨D⟩   =    1     ∑   |ψx|2⟨x|D|x⟩ ,                                           (44)
                                                     Z    x

whereZ =⟨ψ|ψ⟩ =∑x|ψx|2.  Note that|ψ⟩/√Z deﬁnes a normalized state.
    Let  us  now  consider  the  expectation  value  of  an  arbitrary  Pauli  operator  acting  on n
qubits, which we denote by P .  We can express the expectation value as:
                                 ⟨P⟩   =    1    ∑ψ∗xψx′⟨x|P|x′⟩
                                             Z   x,x′
                                                 ∑          (∑                     )
                                        =    1       |ψx|2          ψx′                ,                                  (45)
                                             Z    x             x′  ψx⟨x|P|x′⟩

                                                           19
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


where the term in parenthesis deﬁnes the local Pauli operator P (x):

                                          P (x) =∑      ψx′
                                                     x′  ψx⟨x|P|x′⟩ .                                               (46)

For a givenP , letIα,α =x,y,z, denote the qubit indices where a single-qubit Pauli operator
σα  acts.  For example, consider the Pauli operator acting on 3 qubits P  = σx2⊗σy1⊗σz0; in
this case we would haveIx ={2},Iy ={1},Iz ={0}.  For the RBM ansatz in Eq. (1), we
can calculate the local Pauli operator straightforwardly:
                                                                           
                        P (x)   =    ∏     (−1)xj    i|Iy| ∏    (−1)1−xj
                                       j∈Iz                   j∈Iy
                                                                  
                              × exp−2 ∑             aj(1− 2xj)

                                            j∈Ix∪Iy
                                           (                                          )
                                  m∏  cosh   θµ(x)− 2∑j∈Ix∪IyWjµ(1− 2xj)
                              ×                        cosh (θµ(x))          ,
                                 µ=1
                                                                                                             (47)

where θµ(x) =bµ +∑nj=1Wjµ(1− 2xj).
    The  above  prescription  allows  us  to  calculate  the  expectation  values  in  the  covariance
matrix and force vector in Eq. (4).  For example, let us consider the term⟨O†kH⟩.  We can
write:
                            ⟨O†                ∑    ψ∗xψx′⟨x|O†
                                kH⟩   =    1Z                    kH|x′⟩
                                                x,x′
                                       =    1    ∑     ψ∗xψx′⟨x|O†
                                            Z                       k|x′′⟩⟨x′′|H|x′⟩
                                               x,x′,x′′    (∑
                                       =    1  ∑    |ψx|2         ψx′′
                                            Z                     ψx⟨x|O†k|x′′⟩
                                                 x            x′′   )
                                            ×∑      ψx′
                                                x′  ψx′′⟨x′′|H|x′⟩
                                               ∑
                                       =    1Z      |ψx|2⟨x|O†k|x⟩H(x) ,                                          (48)
                                                 x
where we have used that the operators Ok are diagonal and where we deﬁned a local Hamil-
tonian:                                                 ψx′
                                         H(x) =∑         ψx⟨x|H|x′⟩ .                                               (49)
                                                     x′
Since any Hamiltonian can be expressed in terms of diagonal operators and arbitrary Pauli
operators, we can calculate the local Hamiltonian using our prescription above for diagonal
and local Pauli operators.


                                                        20
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


    In the case of the completely symmetric RBM ansatz, the expectation values take a simple
form.  For example, we can express the contribution of the transverse ﬁeld as:

                            n∑               n∑ (n)
                               ⟨σxi⟩   =          w   |ψw(α)|2
                           i=1  (          w=0
                             ×    nδw0ψw+1(α)ψw(α)   +nδwnψw−1(α)ψw(α)
                                         (                                     ))
                             +δ0<w<n       (n−w)ψw+1(α)ψw(α)   +wψw−1(α)ψw(α)        ,                            (50)

where we have deﬁned ψw(α) as

                                                    m∏
                          ψw(α)   = ea(n−2w)           cosh (bµ +Wµ(n− 2w)) .                           (51)
                                                   µ=1

We can also calculate:
                       n∑                 n∑  (n)
                         ⟨σxiσxj⟩   =           w   |ψw(α)|2
                      i⁄=j   [           w=0

                          ×   δw0n(n− 1)ψw+2ψw   +δwnn(n− 1)ψw−2ψw
                                 (                                       )
                           +δw1    2(n− 1) + (n− 1)(n− 2)ψw+2ψw
                                     (                                       )
                           +δw,n−1     2(n− 1) + (n− 1)(n− 2)ψw−2ψw
                                         (
                           +δ1<w<n−1       2w(n−w) + (n−w)(n−w− 1)ψw+2ψw
                                               )]
                           +w(w− 1)ψw−2ψw           .                                                                       (52)


D Alternative Parallel Tempering Schemes

D.1Standard deviation of     H2 as a measure of temperature
As we indicated in the main text, there is a lot of freedom in choosing the training Hamiltonian
and the parallel tempering update scheme.  Here we present an alternative approach.  We can
choose the Hamiltonian for the rth replica to be given by

                                     H(Γr) = (1− Γr)HM + ΓrHT ,                                          (53)

where HT  is the target Hamiltonian whose ground state we are actually after and HM  is a
suitably chosen mixer Hamiltonian with a trivial ground state.  For example, in the absence
of any constraints,  the mixer can be taken to be the uniform transverse ﬁeld Hamiltonian,
HM =−H0∑ni=1σxi , whereH0 is a characteristic energy scale ofHT.  In this case, for replicas
with  Γr  close  to  0  the  training  Hamiltonian  is  dominated  by  the  transverse  ﬁeld,  and  the

                                                      21
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


ground state is the uniform superposition state.  This is analogous to the high-temperature
limit in “standard” PT, where the diﬀerent replicas operate at diﬀerent temperatures but with
the same Hamiltonian.  For replicas with Γr close to 1, the training Hamiltonian is dominated
by  the  target  Hamiltonian,  and  the  ground  state  is  close  to  the  target  ground  state.   This
is analogous to the low-temperature limit in standard parallel tempering.  The parameter Γr
thus allows us to interpolate between the target parameter landscape at Γr = 1 and a much
simpler parameter landscape at Γr = 0.  For simplicity we choose our distribution of Γr to be
linearly spaced,
                                   Γr = 1−  rN− 1 ,  r = 0,...,N− 1 .                                     (54)

We then propose the following PT update.  Since Γr controls the relative energy scales of HT
and HM, it is not a suitable candidate for the temperature as it was in the main text, so we
propose a diﬀerent choice.  We expect the standard deviation σr  to be 0 for Γr = 1 (r = 0)
because we expect the ANN to reach a good approximation of an eigenstate of HT, assuming
the number ANN parameters is suﬃciently large.  Similarly, for larger r replicas this quantity
should be non-zero since we expect the ANN to be a good approximation of an eigenstate of
H(Γr).  Therefore, we can think ofσr as being a measure of the broadening of the eigenstates
of HT due to the “noise” introduced by Γr < 1.  In this sense, we can think of σr  as being a
kind of temperature.  We thus propose the following probability rule for swap updates between
neighboring pairs r and r + 1:
                   1                                                                 if r = 0 andEr+1<Er

     pr↔r+1 =       0                                                                 if r = 0 and([()])Er+1>Er(55)
                      min    1, exp    Er−    Er+1)(  2σr−     2σr+1                        otherwise .

While  it  is  not  strictly  necessary,  the r  =  0  replica  only  swaps  its  conﬁguration  with  its
neighbor if its neighbor has a better approximation of the ground state.  This is equivalent to
what happens in the main text at zero temperature. The factor of 2 in 2/σr is a choice we make
to ensure that enough replica swaps happen in our simulations.  This is a hyper-parameter
that could be optimized.
    We show the QPT simulation results using this rule for the Precipice problem in Fig. 7
and for the H4 Rectangle in Fig. 8.  The results are comparable to our results from the main
text (Figs. 4, 5, and 6), although the performance using the rule in the main text is better.
We  also  emphasize  that  our  simulations  with  this  rule  did  not  succeed  at  ﬁnding  a  good
approximation of the ground state with N = 5 replicas, while the approach in the main text
does.

D.2Almost constant swap probability
In what follows we use the same the same deﬁnition of the training Hamiltonian as in the main
text (Eq. (7)), as well as the same distribution of Γr  values (Eq. (8)).  We consider a swap
rule that abandons the idea of a temperature altogether;  instead we consider the following
swap probability rule:
                                              1       if r = 0 and   Er+1<     Er

                               pr↔r+1 =        0       if r = 0 and   Er+1>     Er                              (56)
                                                1/4                         otherwise


                                                         22
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure  7:  Optimum  time  to  epsilon  to  reach  a  relative  error  of ϵ  =  10−1  for  the
     Precipice problem as a function of system size n using the QPT swap probability
     rule  in  Eq.  (55)  with  diﬀerent  number  of  QPT  replicas N  with Nmax  =  40.   The
     error bars correspond to the 95% conﬁdence interval calculated using a bootstrap
     with 103 resamplings of the data.


The motivation for this choice is as follows.  The r = 0 replica only swaps its conﬁguration
with  its  neighbor  if  its  neighbor  has  a  better  approximation  of  the  ground  state.   This  is
equivalent to what happens in the main text at zero temperature.  For the remaining replicas,
we swap the replicas with probability 1/4 irrespective of the energies of the conﬁgurations.
We show the QPT simulation results using this rule for the Precipice problem in Fig. 9 and
for  the  H4  Rectangle  in  Fig.  10.   The  results  are  comparable  to  our  results  from  the  main
text (Figs. 4, 5, and 6), although the performance using the rule in the main text is better in
all cases, although there are some qualitative diﬀerences.  For the Precipice problem, we see
a clear separation between the diﬀerent N  values for intermediate n values, which suggests
that  the  constant  swap  probability  with a  smaller  separation  between  replicas  is  hindering
performance compared to the probability rule in the main text.  For the H4  Rectangle, the
larger error bars suggest less consistency in the performance using this scheme.

E Short Note On the Bootstrap Procedure

Let  us  assume  we  have  repeated  our  stochastic  simulations n  times  and  gotten  the  set  of
outcomes{x1,x2,...,xn}.  The outcome of the i-th experiment can be treated as a random
variable Xi,  with  the i-th  experimental  outcome  given Xi  = xi.   We  will  assume  that  all
the random variables are independent and identically distributed with mean µx and standard
deviationσx.  Our goal is to report the mean and uncertainty of some property of the random
variables.  For example, if we are interested in estimatingµx, we may use the the sample mean
¯X as our function:
                                                            n∑
                                                  ¯X =  1n      Xi                                                        (57)
                                                           i=1
From the Central Limit Theorem, we expect that  ¯X∼N (µx,σ2x/n) for suﬃciently large n.
So for suﬃciently largen, we can report our 95% conﬁdence estimate ofµx as ¯x± 2σx√n  where


                                                         23
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission





















                              (a)                                                      (b)

      Figure 8:  Optimum time to epsilon to reach a relative error of ϵ = 10−3 for the H4
      Rectangle  at  diﬀerent  angles  with  (a)  ﬁxed  Hamming  weight  exact  sampling  and
      (b) full exact sampling using the QPT swap probability rule in Eq. (55).  We use
      Nmax  =  20.   The  error  bars  correspond  to  the  95%  conﬁdence  interval  calculated
      using a bootstrap with 103 resamplings of the data.  The lines are to guide the eye.

¯x =  1 ∑n
      n    i=1xi.  We can estimate σ2x by using the sample variance for example.
    However, if instead of estimatingµx, we were interested in the median of Xi, then it is not
obvious how to use the above method to give conﬁdence estimates.  The bootstrap method
allows us to mitigate this problem in a simple way.
    Bootstrapping requires resampling (with replacement) the data (x1,...,xn) uniformly to
acquire nb  bootstrap resamples.  Each bootstrap resample Si  picks n of the data outcomes
randomly with replacement, i.e. Si ={xi1,xi2,...xin}.  So a bootstrap resample eﬀectively
amounts to randomly picking indices from 1 ton with replacement.  For eachSi, we calculate
the property we are interested in, like the median, giving a value Fi.  We can treat the set
{F1,F2,...,Fnb}  as nb  samples  of  the  random  variables Fi.   We  now  calculate  the  sample
mean of F:                                                    nb∑
                                                   ¯F =  1        Fi                                                        (58)
                                                          nb  i=1

Now we can use the Central Limit Theorem (for suﬃciently large nb) that ¯F∼N .  We can
now report our estimate with 95% conﬁdence interval as:

                                                       ¯F± 2σF                                                             (59)

where  ¯F  is the sample mean:
                                                               nb∑
                                                    ¯F  =  1      Fi                                                        (60)
                                                          nb  i=1
and σF  is the standard deviation:

                                                             nb∑
                                           σ2F  =     1nb− 1     (Fi−  ¯F )2                                               (61)
                                                             i=1


                                                           24
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission

















     Figure  9:  Optimum  time  to  epsilon  to  reach  a  relative  error  of ϵ  =  10−1  for  the
     Precipice problem as a function of system size n using the QPT swap probability
     rule  in  Eq.  (56)  with  diﬀerent  number  of  QPT  replicas N  with Nmax  =  40.   The
     error bars correspond to the 95% conﬁdence interval calculated using a bootstrap
     with 103 resamplings of the data.

F The H    4 rectangle

The H4 rectangle, illustrated in Fig. 11, consists of four hydrogen atoms placed in a rectangle,
each with a distance to the center of R.  The separation between these atoms can be further
controlled by the angle between adjacent hydrogen atoms θ.  When θ  is far away from 90◦,
the system resembles two disconnected H2  molecules and the energy can be approximately
calculated as twice the energy of an equivalent H2  molecule.  As the angle approaches 90◦,
however, the distance between the diﬀerent hydrogen atoms becomes equivalent and the sys-
tem becomes degenerate,  leading to a frustrated system with a peak in energy at 90◦.  By
moving from a rectangular system to a square one, the system can be brought arbitrarily close
to a strongly correlated, two conﬁguration system.  This conﬁguration has been shown to lead
to diﬃculty for many atomic modeling algorithms, notably including Coupled Cluster meth-
ods, which incorrectly predict a cusp and minimum at 90◦ for certain radii [51].  Throughout
this work, following Pfau et al.  and others [54, 55], we have used a radius of 1.738 ˚A, which
places the H4  rectangle in a regime where the atoms are nearing full dissociation.  Coupled
Cluster  methods  have  been  shown  to  fail  at  this  radius  [51],  and  single  replica  RBM  runs
often struggle to ﬁnd the ground state energy as seen in the main text,  providing a useful
benchmark for our parallel tempering scheme.
    To create inputs for our calculations,  we consider the Fermionic problem in the second
quantitized formalism
                                 H =∑        tijc†icj + ∑      uijkmc†ic†kcmcj ,                                    (62)
                                         i,j            i,j,k,m
where we deﬁne the fermionic annihilation and creation operators with the anticommutation
relation{c†i,cj} =δi,j.  We deﬁne tij  and uijkm as one- and two-body integrals, respectively.
We then map this fermionic Hamiltonian onto a spin Hamiltonian with the form
                                                         r∑
                                                 H =        hjσj ,                                                       (63)
                                                       j=1

                                                        25
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission





















                             (a)                                                    (b)

     Figure 10:  Optimum time to epsilon to reach a relative error of ϵ = 10−3  for the
     H4 Rectangle at diﬀerent angles with (a) ﬁxed Hamming weight exact sampling and
     (b) full exact sampling using the QPT swap probability rule in Eq. (56).  We use
     Nmax  =  20.   The  error  bars  correspond  to  the  95%  conﬁdence  interval  calculated
     using a bootstrap with 103 resamplings of the data.  The lines are to guide the eye.











     Figure 11:  The arrangement of hydrogen atoms in the H4 rectangle.  The conﬁgura-
     tion is controlled by the radius R and the angle θ.


wherehj are coeﬃcients andσj is an N-fold tensor product of single-qubit Pauli operators I,
σx,σy, andσz.  We use the canonical Jordan-Wigner transformation [26] to map Hamiltonians
of the form of Eq. 62 to Eq. 63.  We use a minimal STO-3G basis set [56] and the OpenFermion
software package [57] to generate and map Hamiltonians for the H4 problem.
    For θ  =  80◦,  the  ground  state  energy  of  the  8  qubit  Hamiltonian  is−1.88016686;  for
θ  =  85◦,  the  ground  state  energy  is−1.87584118;  for θ  =  90◦,  the  ground  state  energy  is
−1.87420093.

References

 [1]D. Landau and K. Binder,      A  Guide  to  Monte  Carlo  Simulations  in  Statistical  Physics,
     Cambridge University Press, USA,  ISBN 0521842387 (2005).

 [2]F.  Becca  and  S.  Sorella,        Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Approaches  for  Correlated  Systems,


                                                         26
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


      Cambridge University Press,  doi:10.1017/9781316417041 (2017).

 [3]E. Y. Loh,  J. E. Gubernatis,  R. T. Scalettar,  S. R. White,  D. J. Scalapino and R. L.
      Sugar,  Sign  problem  in  the numerical  simulation  of  many-electron  systems,  Phys. Rev.
      B 41, 9301 (1990),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.41.9301.

 [4]P.  J.  Reynolds,  D.  M.  Ceperley,  B.  J.  Alder  and  W.  A.  Lester,        Fixed-node  quan-
      tum  monte  carlo  for  molecules,  The Journal of Chemical Physics 77(11), 5593 (1982),
      doi:10.1063/1.443766.

 [5]G. Ortiz,  D. M. Ceperley and R. M. Martin,       New  stochastic  method  for  systems  with
      broken  time-reversal  symmetry:  2d  fermions  in  a  magnetic  ﬁeld,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,
      2777 (1993),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.2777.

 [6]S.  Zhang,   J.  Carlson  and  J.  E.  Gubernatis,          Constrained   path   quantum   monte
      carlo   method   for   fermion   ground   states,       Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   74,   3652   (1995),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.3652.

 [7]I.  Aﬄeck,  T.  Kennedy,  E.  H.  Lieb  and  H.  Tasaki,         Valence  bond  ground  states  in
      isotropic quantum antiferromagnets,  Communications in Mathematical Physics 115(3),
      477 (1988),  doi:10.1007/BF01218021.

 [8]S.  R.  White,       Density  matrix  formulation  for  quantum  renormalization  groups,   Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 69, 2863 (1992),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.2863.

 [9]S. R. White,      Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormalization groups, Phys. Rev.
      B 48, 10345 (1993),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.48.10345.

[10]M.  Fannes,  B.  Nachtergaele  and  R.  F.  Werner,          Finitely  correlated  states  on  quan-
      tum   spin   chains,     Communications  in  Mathematical  Physics  144(3),   443  (1992),
      doi:10.1007/BF02099178.

[11]U.  Schollw¨ock,         The  density-matrix  renormalization  group,   Rev.  Mod.  Phys. 77,  259
      (2005),  doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.77.259.

[12]U.    Schollw¨ock,                   The     density-matrix     renormalization     group     in     the     age
      of     matrix     product     states,             Annals     of     Physics    326(1),      96     (2011),
      doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2010.09.012,  January 2011 Special Issue.

[13]F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac,       Renormalization algorithms for quantum-many body systems
      in two and higher dimensions,  arXiv e-prints cond-mat/0407066 (2004).

[14]R.   Or´us,             A   practical   introduction   to   tensor   networks:     Matrix   product   states
      and    projected    entangled    pair    states,         Annals   of   Physics   349,    117   (2014),
      doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013,  1306.2164.

[15]G. Carleo and M. Troyer,        Solving the quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural
      networks,  Science 355(6325), 602 (2017),  doi:10.1126/science.aag2302.

[16]K.  Choo,   T.  Neupert  and  G.  Carleo,            Two-dimensional   frustrated J1−J2   model
      studied  with  neural  network  quantum  states,     Phys.  Rev.  B  100,   125124  (2019),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.125124.

                                                           27
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


[17]M.   Schmitt   and   M.   Heyl,               Quantum    many-body    dynamics    in    two    dimen-
      sions   with   artiﬁcial   neural   networks,       Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   125,   100503   (2020),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.100503.

[18]C.  Roth,  A.  Szab´o  and  A.  MacDonald,          High-accuracy  variational  Monte  Carlo  for
      frustrated  magnets  with  deep  neural  networks,  arXiv e-prints arXiv:2211.07749 (2022),
      2211.07749.

[19]M. Bukov, M. Schmitt and M. Dupont,         Learning  the  ground  state  of  a  non-stoquastic
      quantum Hamiltonian in a rugged neural network landscape, SciPost Phys. 10, 147 (2021),
      doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.10.6.147.

[20]R. H. Swendsen and J.-S. Wang,        Replica  monte  carlo  simulation  of  spin-glasses,  Phys.
      Rev. Lett. 57, 2607 (1986),  doi:https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.2607.

[21]C. J. Geyer,        Parallel tempering, In E. M. Keramidas and S. M. Kaufman, eds., Comput-
      ing  Science  and  Statistics  Proceedings  of  the  23rd  Symposium  on  the  Interface, p. 156.
      American Statistical Association, New York (1991).

[22]K.  Hukushima  and  K.  Nemoto,           Exchange  monte  carlo  method  and  application  to
      spin  glass  simulations,   Journal  of  the  Physical  Society  of  Japan 65(6),  1604  (1996),
      doi:https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.65.1604.

[23]R.  A.  Ba˜nos,  A.  Cruz,  L.  A.  Fernandez,  J.  M.  Gil-Narvion,  A.  Gordillo-Guerrero,
      M. Guidetti, A. Maiorano, F. Mantovani, E. Marinari, V. Martin-Mayor, J. Monforte-
      Garcia, A. M. Sudupe et al., Nature of the spin-glass phase at experimental length scales,
      Journal  of  Statistical  Mechanics:   Theory  and  Experiment  2010(06),  P06026  (2010),
      doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2010/06/p06026.

[24]E.  Farhi,  D.  Gosset,  I.  Hen,  A.  W.  Sandvik,  P.  Shor,  A.  P.  Young  and  F.  Zam-
      poni,    Performance  of  the  quantum  adiabatic  algorithm  on  random  instances  of  two
      optimization  problems   on  regular  hypergraphs,     Phys.  Rev.  A  86,   052334  (2012),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.86.052334.

[25]T.  Albash,  G.  Wagenbreth  and  I.  Hen,         Oﬀ-diagonal  expansion  quantum  monte  carlo,
      Phys. Rev. E 96, 063309 (2017),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.96.063309.
[26]P. Jordan and E. P. Wigner,        ¨Uber das paulische ¨aquivalenzverbot, In The Collected Works
      of Eugene Paul Wigner, pp. 109–129. Springer (1993).

[27]K.  Choo,  A.  Mezzacapo  and  G.  Carleo,         Fermionic  neural-network  states  for  ab-initio
      electronic  structure,  Nature Communications 11(1),  2368 (2020),  doi:10.1038/s41467-
      020-15724-9.

[28]S. Sorella,        Green function monte carlo with stochastic reconﬁguration,  Phys. Rev. Lett.
      80, 4558 (1998),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.4558.

[29]S.  Sorella,         Generalized  lanczos  algorithm  for  variational  quantum  monte  carlo,   Phys.
      Rev. B 64, 024512 (2001),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.64.024512.

[30]E. H. Moore,       On the reciprocal of the general algebraic matrix, In Bulletin of the American
      Mathematical Society, vol. 26, pp. 394–395 (1920).

                                                           28
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


[31]R. Penrose,        A generalized inverse for matrices,  Mathematical Proceedings of the Cam-
      bridge Philosophical Society 51(3), 406 (1955),  doi:10.1017/S0305004100030401.

[32]G. Fabiani and J. H. Mentink,        Investigating ultrafast quantum magnetism with machine
      learning,  SciPost Phys. 7, 4 (2019),  doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.7.1.004.

[33]D. P. Kingma and J. Ba,        Adam:  A Method for Stochastic Optimization,  arXiv e-prints
      arXiv:1412.6980 (2014),  1412.6980.

[34]S.-C. T. Choi and M. A. Saunders,        Algorithm 937:  Minres-qlp for symmetric and hermi-
      tian linear equations and least-squares problems, ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 40(2) (2014),
      doi:10.1145/2527267.

[35]C.-Y. Park and M. J. Kastoryano,        Geometry  of  learning  neural  quantum  states,  Phys.
      Rev. Research 2, 023232 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023232.

[36]S.-i. Amari,        Natural Gradient Works Eﬃciently in Learning, Neural Computation 10(2),
      251 (1998),  doi:10.1162/089976698300017746.

[37]M. Casula, C. Attaccalite and S. Sorella,        Correlated geminal wave function for molecules:
      An eﬃcient resonating valence bond approach, The Journal of Chemical Physics 121(15),
      7110 (2004),  doi:10.1063/1.1794632.

[38]C. Roth,       Iterative Retraining of Quantum Spin Models Using Recurrent Neural Networks,
      arXiv e-prints arXiv:2003.06228 (2020),  2003.06228.

[39]M. Hibat-Allah, R. G. Melko and J. Carrasquilla,        Supplementing Recurrent Neural Net-
      work Wave Functions with Symmetry and Annealing to Improve Accuracy, arXiv e-prints
      arXiv:2207.14314 (2022),  2207.14314.

[40]T.  Okabe,  M.  Kawata,  Y.  Okamoto  and  M.  Mikami,          Replica-exchange  monte  carlo
      method  for  the  isobaric–isothermal  ensemble,    Chemical  Physics  Letters  335(5),  435
      (2001),  doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2614(01)00055-0.

[41]S.  Syed,  A.  Bouchard-Cˆot´e,  G.  Deligiannidis  and  A.  Doucet,          Non-reversible  parallel
      tempering:  a scalable highly parallel mcmc scheme,  Journal of Royal Statistical Society,
      Series B 84, 321 (2021),  doi:10.1111/rssb.12464.

[42]N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller and E. Teller,        Equation
      of state calculations by fast computing machines, The Journal of Chemical Physics 21(6),
      1087 (1953),  doi:10.1063/1.1699114.

[43]W. K. Hastings,        Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applica-
      tions,  Biometrika 57(1), 97 (1970),  doi:10.1093/biomet/57.1.97.

[44]T. F. Rønnow, Z. Wang, J. Job, S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, D. Wecker, J. M. Martinis, D. A.
      Lidar and M. Troyer,  Deﬁning and detecting quantum speedup,  Science 345(6195), 420
      (2014),  doi:10.1126/science.1252319.

[45]J. King, S. Yarkoni, M. M. Nevisi, J. P. Hilton and C. C. McGeoch,       Benchmarking a quan-
      tum annealing processor with the time-to-target metric,  arXiv e-prints arXiv:1508.05087
      (2015),  1508.05087.

                                                         29
 SciPost Physics                                                                           Submission


[46]S. Bravyi, D. P. DiVincenzo, R. I. Oliveira and B. M. Terhal,       The complexity of stoquastic
      local hamiltonian problems,  Quant. Inf. Comp. 8(5), 0361 (2008).

[47]S. Bravyi and B. Terhal,        Complexity  of  stoquastic  frustration-free  hamiltonians,  SIAM
      Journal on Computing 39(4), 1462 (2009),  doi:10.1137/08072689X.

[48]W. van Dam, M. Mosca and U. Vazirani,        How powerful is adiabatic quantum computa-
      tion?,  In Proceedings 42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp.
      279–287,  doi:10.1109/SFCS.2001.959902 (2001).

[49]S.  Muthukrishnan,  T.  Albash  and  D.  A.  Lidar,          Tunneling  and  speedup  in  quantum
      optimization  for  permutation-symmetric  problems,    Phys.  Rev.  X  6,  031010  (2016),
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.6.031010.

[50]J. Paldus, P. Piecuch, L. Pylypow and B. Jeziorski,        Application of hilbert-space coupled-
      cluster theory to simple (h 2) 2 model systems:  Planar models, Physical Review A 47(4),
      2738 (1993),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.47.2738.

[51]T.  Van  Voorhis  and  M.  Head-Gordon,         Benchmark  variational  coupled  cluster  doubles
      results,  The Journal of Chemical Physics 113(20), 8873 (2000),  doi:10.1063/1.1319643.

[52]M.  Suzuki,           Relationship  between  d-dimensional  quantal  spin  systems  and  (d+  1)-
      dimensional Ising systems:  Equivalence, critical exponents and systematic approximants
      of  the  partition  function  and  spin  correlations,   Progress  of  theoretical  physics 56(5),
      1454 (1976),  doi:10.1143/PTP.56.1454.

[53]H. G. Katzgraber, S. Trebst, D. A. Huse and M. Troyer,        Feedback-optimized parallel tem-
      pering monte carlo, Journal of Statistical Mechanics:  Theory and Experiment 2006(03),
      P03018 (2006),  doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2006/03/p03018.

[54]D. Pfau, J. S. Spencer, A. G. D. G. Matthews and W. M. C. Foulkes,        Ab initio solution of
      the many-electron schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks,  Phys. Rev. Research
      2, 033429 (2020),  doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429.

[55]H.  G.  A.  Burton  and  A.  J.  W.  Thom,          Holomorphic  hartree–fock  theory:   An  inher-
      ently multireference approach, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 12(1), 167
      (2016),  doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.5b01005.

[56]W. J. Hehre, R. F. Stewart and J. A. Pople,        Self-consistent  molecular-orbital  methods.
      i.  use  of  gaussian  expansions  of  slater-type  atomic  orbitals,   The  Journal  of  Chemical
      Physics 51(6), 2657 (1969),  doi:10.1063/1.1672392.

[57]J. R. McClean,  N. C. Rubin,  K. J. Sung,  I. D. Kivlichan,  X. Bonet-Monroig,  Y. Cao,
      C. Dai, E. S. Fried, C. Gidney, B. Gimby, P. Gokhale, T. H¨aner et al., OpenFermion:  the
      electronic  structure  package  for  quantum  computers,  Quantum Science and Technology
      5(3), 034014 (2020),  doi:10.1088/2058-9565/ab8ebc.







                                                          30