Can neural quantum states learn volume-law ground states?
Giacomo Passetti, 1 Damian Hofmann, 2 Pit Neitemeier, 1
Lukas Grunwald,1, 2 Michael A. Sentef, 3, 2 and Dante M. Kennes 1, 2
1Institut f¨ ur Theorie der Statistischen Physik, RWTH Aachen University and
JARA-Fundamentals of Future Information Technology, 52056 Aachen, Germany
2Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Center for
Free-Electron Laser Science (CFEL), Luruper Chaussee 149, 22761 Hamburg, Germany
3H H Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom
(Dated: December 16, 2022)
We study whether neural quantum states based on multi-layer feed-forward networks can ﬁnd
ground states which exhibit volume-law entanglement entropy. As a testbed, we employ the paradig-
matic Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model. We ﬁnd that both shallow and deep feed-forward networks require
an exponential number of parameters in order to represent the ground state of this model. This
demonstrates that suﬃciently complicated quantum states, although being physical solutions to rel-
evant models and not pathological cases, can still be diﬃcult to learn to the point of intractability
at larger system sizes. This highlights the importance of further investigations into the physical
properties of quantum states amenable to an eﬃcient neural representation.
Introduction.— The exponential complexity of repre-
senting general quantum many-body states is a key chal-
lenge in computational quantum physics. To simulate
systems beyond small sizes tractable by exact diagonal-
ization methods, it is necessary to ﬁnd an eﬃcient rep-
resentation of quantum states of interest. This is made
possible by the fact that physically relevant states usu-
ally possess a high degree of structure, compared to an
arbitrary Hilbert space vector. As a prominent example,
ground states of local, gapped Hamiltonians exhibit an
area law of the entanglement entropy, i.e., an entangle-
ment entropy that scales like the boundary of the subre-
gion instead of its volume. For systems with a low dimen-
sionality, typically 1D, the area law allows for an eﬃcient
representation of the wave function as a matrix product
state, which can be simulated by algorithms such as the
density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [1–5].
However, many quantum states of physical interest dis-
play a volume law scaling of the entanglement entropy
[6], for which generally applicable eﬃcient representa-
tions are not known to this date. One class of variational
approximations that has been studied to overcome this
challenge are neural quantum states (NQS) [7], which
are based on an artiﬁcial-neural-network representation
of the wave function’s probability amplitudes [8–10] and
have shown promising results for the study of discrete lat-
tice models even beyond one dimension [11–19]. Notably,
it has been shown that a shallow NQS ansatz is able to
eﬃciently represent quantum states featuring volume-law
entanglement [20, 21], suggesting that this method could
complement tensor network techniques for the purpose of
uncovering the physics of highly entangled states. Nev-
ertheless, while for matrix product states and more gen-
eral tensor-network-based approaches it is known how the
entanglement scaling limits the representation capabili-
ties of the ansatz [3], there is so far no analogous phys-
ical property that directly relates to the ability of an
NQS to learn a given quantum state. Universal approx-
imation theorems, which have been proven for several
broad classes of neural networks, guarantee that, in the
limit of inﬁnite network size, a neural network ansatz can
theoretically represent any continuous function to arbi-
trary precision [22–25]. Still, these results do not provide
bounds on the scaling of the required number of param-
eters with the system size. For practical applications of
NQS, it is thus a central question to determine which
classes of quantum many-body states can be eﬃciently
represented that are impossible to tackle with other es-
tablished variational ans¨ atze.
In this Letter, we investigate the capabilities of NQS
based on shallow and deep feed-forward neural networks
(FFNNs) to represent ground states of the Sachdev-Ye-
Kitaev (SYK) model [26–28], which is a paradigmatic
model for quantum chaos and non-Fermi liquid behav-
ior [29] and which features a volume-law entanglement
in the ground state [30]. We present a systematic study
of the representation accuracy achieved by the FFNN in
dependence of the network hyperparameters. We ﬁnd an
exponential dependence on the system size for the num-
ber of network parameters required to learn the SYK
ground state. This demonstrates limitations of fully gen-
eral NQS to learn complicated quantum ground states of
physical interest.
Model.— The SYK model describes strongly corre-
lated fermions on L sites and is deﬁned by the Hamilto-
nian [26–28]
ˆHsyk (J) = 1
(2L)3/2
∑
ijkl
Jij;kl ˆc†
i ˆc†
jˆckˆcl, (1)
where ˆc(†)
i , i∈{ 1,...L }, are fermionic ladder operators.
The vertices Jij;kl have the symmetry J∗
ij;kl =Jlk;ji and
Jij;kl =−Jji;kl and are random, uncorrelated, all-to-all
couplings that are drawn from a Gaussian unitary en-
semble (GUE) [31] with mean E [Jij;kl] = 0 and vari-
ance E
[
|Jij;kl|2]
= 1 [29]. Consequently, quantities of
physical interest are expectation values over the ensem-
ble of couplingsJ, which is evaluated after the quantum-
arXiv:2212.02204v2  [quant-ph]  15 Dec 2022
2
FIG. 1. Cartoon representation of the SYK model. Gray cir-
cles represent lattice sites and every diﬀerent colour shown has
two corresponding lines in total connecting four sites. Each
color represents one element of the coupling matrix Jij;kl of
the SYK model deﬁned by Eq. (1).
expectation value. The ground state of the SYK model
describes a strongly correlated non-Fermi liquid without
quasi-particle excitations [29], that exhibits volume-law
entanglement entropy [32, 33]. In the thermodynamic
limit the model becomes self-averaging and exactly solv-
able, but despite this exact solvability, the ground state is
not a Gaussian state, i.e. not a product of single particle
wave-functions [34]. At ﬁnite sizes, particularly studied
in the context of quantum chaos [35, 36] and experimental
realizations [37], no exact solutions are known. Diﬀerent
variational ans¨ atze to represent the ground state have
been proposed recently [34, 38]. Here the model can be
analyzed by employing approximations, or numerically,
by drawing a set of couplings {J (n)}N
n=1 from the GUE,
constructing the corresponding Hamiltonians ˆHsyk(J (n)),
and solving for the ground states |ΨGS(J (n))⟩. Finally,
the properties of interest, such as expectation values, are
averaged over this ground state ensemble. Because of the
self-averaging property of the SYK model, it suﬃces to
evaluate expectation values for a single realization of J
in the thermodynamic limit [29].
Network architecture.— We use a fully-connected
FFNN [Figs. 2(a), 3(a)]
F (x) =f (µ)◦···◦ f (1)(x),
f (l)(y) =φ(W (l)y +b(l))
(2)
which is a composition of µ layers f (l), each applying
an aﬃne transformation and a scaled exponential linear
unit (SELU) activation function φ [39] as pointwise non-
linearity. Each layer has αL neurons, where α is the
ﬁxed hidden unit density. The output of the ﬁnal layer is
reduced to a (scalar) log-probability amplitude with re-
spect to the computational basis{|x⟩} by an exponential
sum,
log⟨x|ψθ⟩ = log
αL∑
i=1
exp[Fi(x)]. (3)
Here, θ denotes the vector of all variational parameters,
which contains all entries of the weight matricesW (l) and
bias vectors b(l). The variational parameters and there-
fore network outputs are complex numbers, with the acti-
vation function being applied separately to real and imag-
inary parts. The total number of network parameters
scales as Npar =O(µα 2L2). We choose the occupation
number basis (as has been done in previous NQS stud-
ies of fermionic molecular Hamiltonians [40–42]) at half
ﬁlling, which ﬁxes the fermion number to L/2. There-
fore, the input to the neural network (2) is a vector of
occupation numbers x∈{ 0, 1}L such that∑
ixi =L/2.
We have veriﬁed our results for several variations of
this network architecture. In particular, we have evalu-
ated using tanh as nonlinear activation function as well
as the addition of skip connections, which can be used to
counteract the increased training complexity of networks
beyond a certain depth [43, 44]. These variations did
not achieve better results compared to those presented
in the main text. Details can be found in Section III of
the supplemental material (SM) [45].
Optimization.— The ground state of the network is
obtained by numerically minimizing the overlap diﬀer-
ence
δO(θ,J ) = 1−
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⟨ψθ|ψGS(J)⟩
⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩
⏐⏐⏐⏐ (4)
between the variational state |ψθ⟩ and the ground state
|ψGS(J)⟩ with respect to the variational parameters θ
using Adam [46]. We work with system sizes up toL = 18
sites, which are accessible via exact diagonalization (ED)
and thus enable training using a supervised learning (SL)
protocol targeting the overlap with the ED ground state
|ψGS(J)⟩ [47]. The system size allows us to evaluate the
loss function (4) by summation over the full Hilbert space
(preventing any potential errors arising from Monte Carlo
sampling) and to assess the quality of our results using
the relative energy error
δE(θ;J) = E(θ;J)−EGS(J)
EGS(J) (5)
compared to the target ground state energy EGS(J) =
⟨ψGS(J)| ˆHsyk(J)|ψGS(J)⟩. Details on the optimization
scheme are reported in Section II of the SM [45].
Results.— To start, we discuss the minimum energy
error δEmin = min|t∈[0,tmax]δE(θ,J ) reached within a
maximum number of iterations tmax of the optimization
protocol. Figure 2(b) shows the dependence of δEmin on
the network width α for a network with a ﬁxed num-
ber of µ = 2 layers, while Fig. 3(b) shows the results as
a function of network depth µ for deep networks with
constant width α = 4. We select δEthreshold = 10−3 as
3
FIG. 2. (a) Shallow fully-connected feed-forward neural net-
work, α denotes the hidden unit density of each layer and
thus parametrizes the width of the network. (b), (c), (d) Rel-
ative ground state energy error δE as function of the network
width α for several system sizes and random initializations
after (b) 5× 104, (c) 10 5, and (d) 2 × 105 simulation steps,
respectively. The color of each set of data points corresponds
to the average over four independent realizations of the net-
work initial weights, for the system size L as indicated in the
legend. The coloured areas give the maximum and minimum
values of δE for the four independent runs. Black bars indi-
cate δEthreshold = 10−3.
a threshold error to assess successful convergence to the
desired ground state. With this threshold, one can see
in Figs. 2(b) and 3(b) that at any ﬁxed number of train-
ing iterations tmax there is a systematic improvement of
the accuracy with respect to increasing both α and µ,
as one would expect given the increased representation
capabilities of the network at larger sizes.
Next, we determine the minimum number of varia-
tional parameters at which the network is able to learn
the ground state with the desired energy of δEthreshold.
Especially for the smallest system sizes, there is a clear
transition between regimes where the network is able or
unable to learn the state (in particular as a function of
α in the shallow network). For larger system sizes, it is
somewhat more diﬃcult to assess convergence. While
both very small and very large networks converge to
energies above or below the desired threshold within a
reasonable optimization time, there is an intermediate
regime where the energy gets close to the threshold but
only converges at very long time scales. In order to sys-
tematically identify a value of α or µ at that boundary,
we have developed a criterion used to truncate optimiza-
FIG. 3. (a) Deep fully-connected feed forward neural net-
work, µ denotes the number of layers and thus the network
depth. (b), (c), (d) Relative energy error δE as function of
the network number of layers µ for several system sizes and
random initializations after (b) 5×104, (c) 105, and (d) 2×105
simulation steps, respectively. The color of each set of data
points corresponds to the average over four independent real-
izations of the network’s initial weights, for the system size L
as indicated in the legend. The coloured areas give the max-
imum and minimum values of δE for the four independent
runs. Black bars indicate δEthreshold = 10−3.
tion runs after a reasonable optimization time when those
runs are predicted to ultimately converge to a δE(θ,J )
higher thanδEthreshold. See Section II B of the SM [45] for
details. In Fig. 4 we show the number of network param-
eters at the critical αmin or µmin at which the network
is able to reach the target energy accuracy threshold.
This allows for a comparison of network expressiveness
for both varying width and depth on equal footing. We
ﬁnd that for both the shallow and deep network, an ex-
ponentially growing number of parameters is needed to
achieve the target energy error. A comparison with the
Hilbert space dimension reveals that the network only
reaches this threshold once the number of variational pa-
rameters exceeds the number of probability amplitudes
contained in the respective state vector. Hence, we ﬁnd
that our deep feed-forward NQS ansatz as trained here
does not learn a more eﬃcient representation of the SYK
ground state than the full state vector representation.
It is conceivable, in particular given the fully-connected
nature of our ansatz, that there is some redundancy in
the learned variational parameters, which could be used
to achieve a degree of compression after training. In or-
der to investigate this possibility, we have performed a
low-rank approximation based on singular value decom-
4
FIG. 4. Minimum number of parameters Npar required for
the FFNN to learn the ground state of the SYK model as
function of the system size L. Results are shown for the scal-
ing with network width in a shallow ( µ = 2) network (blue
lines) and for the scaling with network depth for ﬁxed α = 4
(red line). In both cases, an exponential scaling in the system
size is observed, which matches the scaling of the full Hilbert
space dimension dimH (dashed line). The Npar scaling for the
ground state of the Heisenberg model (blue) and the associ-
ated quadratic polynomial law are reported for comparison.
position of the weight matrices [48], the details of which
are reported in Section V of the SM [45]. This analysis,
however, has not revealed such an redundancy.
Our scaling results cannot be interpreted as an im-
mediate consequence of the entanglement scaling of the
SYK model, as NQS are known to be able to eﬃciently
represent some volume-law quantum states [20], while
they seem to fail for others (as shown here). While a
particular realization of the SYK Hamiltonian is of sig-
niﬁcantly higher complexity than a low-dimensional local
lattice Hamiltonian (both because of its fully connected
structure and the∝L4 randomly drawn interaction ma-
trix elements), its ground state still exhibits more struc-
ture than a random Hilbert space vector. Since it is
well known that deep (and, in fact, already two-layer)
networks are able to memorize even completely random
data once the number of network parameters exceeds the
number of data points [49], these results provide evidence
that our FFNN ansatz does not learn to utilize any of
this structure but only manages to learn it as unstruc-
tured random data. This is in stark contrast to more
structured lattice Hamiltonians, where it is clear from
previous works that neural quantum states can approxi-
mate ground state energies with sub-exponential scaling
and thus do manage to make use of structure present
in the quantum ground state [50, 51], although expo-
nential scaling results as a function of real time have
been previously found for time-evolved states in a one-
dimensional lattice spin model [52]. We have found com-
parable sub-exponential behavior when evaluating our
training procedure on the ground state of the Heisen-
berg spin model ˆHHeisb =∑N
i=1
∑3
q=1 ˆσ(q)
i ˆσ(q)
i+1 on a one-
dimensional chain with periodic boundary conditions di-
agonalized in the same zero-magnetization subspace used
for the SYK computations. The scaling of the required
number of parameters to reach δEthreshold in this model
is also reported in Fig. 4. In this case, a relatively small
and ﬁxed α = 1 and µ = 2 independent of the sys-
tem size are suﬃcient to reach this threshold, implying a
polynomial scaling of the required number of parameters
Npar =O(L2). This corresponds to an eﬀective compres-
sion of the information contained in the exact state vec-
tor and allows to study sizes beyond those tractable by
full state simulation [7, 50]. However, the same approach
fails to be useful in the more complex SYK model case.
Discussion.— We have tackled the prototypical SYK
model using an NQS variational ansatz, presenting a sys-
tematic study of the ability of deep FFNNs to learn the
volume-law entangled ground states of this model. Focus-
ing on the scaling of the required number of parameters
to describe the ground state to a desired and ﬁxed accu-
racy we ﬁnd that the size of the FFNN ansatz needs to
grow exponentially in the system size. With this we show
explicitly that the neural network ansatz is unable to ef-
ﬁciently represent SYK ground states in larger systems
in spite of general results raising such hopes. We have
performed this analysis using a variety of training tech-
niques (as detailed in the SM [45]), showing that the ob-
served scaling is robust to such implementation choices.
While the proven capability of random RBMs to repre-
sent volume-law quantum states [20, 21] indicates that
NQS methods have the potential to tackle problems out
of the reach of established tensor-network based methods,
our results demonstrate that the entanglement entropy is
not the property that determines whether or not a phys-
ical quantum state can be eﬃciently represented by an
NQS. It remains an intriguing open question which other
properties of a physical quantum state determine the eﬃ-
cient applicability of NQS-based methods. NQS ans¨ atze
more speciﬁcally tailored to fermionic systems could po-
tentially achieve better scaling [42, 53]. Studies in this
direction would help elucidate to what extent the non-
local parity structure inherent to fermionic models [54]
aﬀects the learnability of the SYK ground state. Separat-
ing this inﬂuence from other sources of complexity, such
as the lack of spatial structure and the disorder induced
by random couplings, and thereby exploring the inter-
mediate region between states that can be learned with
compression (such as in the Heisenberg and similar spin
models) and states that cannot (such as the SYK results
presented here) can provide an improved understanding
of the complexity of physical quantum states.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge helpful discussions with Giuseppe
Carleo, Sebastian Goldt, Javed Lindner, Claudia Merger,
Alexandre Ren´ e, and Attila Szab´ o. NQS calculations
have been performed using NetKet 3 [55, 56] with jax
5
[57]. Computations were performed on the HPC system
Ada at the Max Planck Computing and Data Facility
(MPCDF). The authors also gratefully acknowledge com-
puting time granted by the JARA Vergabegremium and
provided on the JARA partition part of the supercom-
puter JURECA at Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich [58] under
the project ID enhancerg. We acknowledge support by
the Max Planck-New York City Center for Nonequilib-
rium Quantum Phenomena.
[1] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Physical Review B 73
(2006), 10.1103/physrevb.73.094423.
[2] F. Verstraete, V. Murg, and J. Cirac, Advances in
Physics 57, 143 (2008).
[3] J. Eisert, M. Cramer, and M. B. Plenio, Reviews of
Modern Physics 82, 277 (2010).
[4] U. Schollw¨ ock, Annals of Physics326, 96 (2011).
[5] J. I. Cirac, D. P´ erez-Garc´ ıa, N. Schuch, and
F. Verstraete, Reviews of Modern Physics 93 (2021),
10.1103/revmodphys.93.045003.
[6] E. Bianchi, L. Hackl, M. Kieburg, M. Rigol, and L. Vid-
mar, PRX Quantum 3, 030201 (2022).
[7] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Science 355, 602 (2017).
[8] J. Schmidhuber, Neural Networks 61, 85 (2015).
[9] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, Nature 521, 436
(2015).
[10] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learn-
ing (MIT Press, 2016) http://www.deeplearningbook.
org.
[11] I. Glasser, N. Pancotti, M. August, I. D. Rodriguez, and
J. I. Cirac, Physical Review X 8 (2018), 10.1103/phys-
revx.8.011006.
[12] S. R. Clark, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical 51, 135301 (2018).
[13] R. Kaubruegger, L. Pastori, and J. C. Budich, Physical
Review B 97 (2018), 10.1103/physrevb.97.195136.
[14] K. Choo, T. Neupert, and G. Carleo, Physical Review
B 100 (2019), 10.1103/physrevb.100.125124.
[15] G. Fabiani and J. H. Mentink, SciPost Phys. 7, 004
(2019).
[16] M. Schmitt and M. Heyl, Physical Review Letters 125
(2020), 10.1103/physrevlett.125.100503.
[17] G. Fabiani, M. Bouman, and J. Mentink, Phys-
ical Review Letters 127 (2021), 10.1103/phys-
revlett.127.097202.
[18] N. Astrakhantsev, T. Westerhout, A. Tiwari, K. Choo,
A. Chen, M. H. Fischer, G. Carleo, and T. Ne-
upert, Physical Review X 11 (2021), 10.1103/phys-
revx.11.041021.
[19] C. Roth, A. Szab´ o, and A. MacDonald, “High-accuracy
variational monte carlo for frustrated magnets with deep
neural networks,” (2022).
[20] D.-L. Deng, X. Li, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. X 7,
021021 (2017).
[21] X.-Q. Sun, T. Nebabu, X. Han, M. O. Flynn, and X.-L.
Qi, Phys. Rev. B 106, 115138 (2022).
[22] G. Cybenko, Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Sys-
tems 2, 303 (1989).
[23] K. Hornik, Neural Networks 4, 251 (1991).
[24] A. Pinkus, Acta Numerica 8, 143 (1999).
[25] P. Kidger and T. Lyons, in Proceedings of Thirty Third
Conference on Learning Theory, Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, Vol. 125, edited by J. Abernethy and
S. Agarwal (PMLR, 2020) pp. 2306–2327.
[26] S. Sachdev and J. Ye, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3339 (1993).
[27] A. Kitaev, “A simple model of quantum holography,”
(2015).
[28] J. Maldacena and D. Stanford, Phys. Rev. D 94, 106002
(2016).
[29] D. Chowdhury, A. Georges, O. Parcollet, and S. Sachdev,
Reviews of Modern Physics 94, 035004 (2022).
[30] C. Liu, X. Chen, and L. Balents, Phys. Rev. B 97, 245126
(2018).
[31] G. Akemann, J. Baik, and P. D. Francesco, eds., The Ox-
ford Handbook of Random Matrix Theory (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2015).
[32] W. Fu and S. Sachdev, Phys. Rev. B 94, 035135 (2016).
[33] P. Zhang, (2022).
[34] A. Haldar, O. Tavakol, and T. Scaﬃdi, Phys. Rev. Re-
search 3, 023020 (2021).
[35] A. Altland and D. Bagrets, Nuclear Physics B 930, 45
(2018).
[36] A. M. Garc´ ıa-Garc´ ıa and J. J. M. Verbaarschot, Phys.
Rev. D 94, 126010 (2016).
[37] M. Brzezinska, Y. Guan, O. V. Yazyev, S. Sachdev, and
A. Kruchkov, (2022), arXiv:2208.01032.
[38] J. Kim, J. Kim, and D. Rosa, Phys. Rev. Research 3,
023203 (2021).
[39] G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, A. Mayr, and
S. Hochreiter, “Self-normalizing neural networks,”
(2017), arXiv:1706.02515.
[40] K. Choo, A. Mezzacapo, and G. Carleo, Nature Com-
munications 11 (2020), 10.1038/s41467-020-15724-9.
[41] P.-J. Yang, M. Sugiyama, K. Tsuda, and T. Yanai,
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 16, 3513
(2020).
[42] J. Hermann, J. Spencer, K. Choo, A. Mezzacapo,
W. M. C. Foulkes, D. Pfau, G. Carleo, and F. No´ e, “Ab-
initio quantum chemistry with neural-network wavefunc-
tions,” (2022).
[43] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, in 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) (2016) pp. 770–778.
[44] H. Li, Z. Xu, G. Taylor, C. Studer, and T. Goldstein,
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018,
Montr´ eal, Canada, edited by S. Bengio, H. M. Wal-
lach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
R. Garnett (2018) pp. 6391–6401.
[45] See Supplementary Material at [link to be inserted] for
details on the network architecture, training protocols,
and comparisons with diﬀerent optimisation schemes.
[46] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization,” (2014), arXiv:1412.6980.
[47] B. J´ onsson, B. Bauer, and G. Carleo, “Neural-network
states for the classical simulation of quantum comput-
ing,” (2018).
6
[48] J. Xue, J. Li, and Y. Gong, in Interspeech 2013 (ISCA,
2013).
[49] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and
O. Vinyals, Commun. ACM 64, 107 (2021).
[50] D. Sehayek, A. Golubeva, M. S. Albergo, B. Kulchytskyy,
G. Torlai, and R. G. Melko, Physical Review B 100
(2019), 10.1103/physrevb.100.195125.
[51] L. L. Viteritti, F. Ferrari, and F. Becca, SciPost Physics
12 (2022), 10.21468/scipostphys.12.5.166.
[52] S.-H. Lin and F. Pollmann, physica status solidi (b) 259,
2100172 (2022).
[53] J. Robledo Moreno, G. Carleo, A. Georges, and
J. Stokes, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 119 (2022), 10.1073/pnas.2122059119.
[54] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Journal of Statistical Me-
chanics: Theory and Experiment 2005, P09012 (2005).
[55] F. Vicentini, D. Hofmann, A. Szab´ o, D. Wu, C. Roth,
C. Giuliani, G. Pescia, J. Nys, V. Vargas-Calder´ on,
N. Astrakhantsev, and G. Carleo, SciPost Phys. Code-
bases , 7 (2022).
[56] G. Carleo, K. Choo, D. Hofmann, J. E. Smith, T. West-
erhout, F. Alet, E. J. Davis, S. Efthymiou, I. Glasser,
S.-H. Lin, M. Mauri, G. Mazzola, C. B. Mendl, E. van
Nieuwenburg, O. O’Reilly, H. Th´ eveniaut, G. Torlai,
F. Vicentini, and A. Wietek, SoftwareX 10, 100311
(2019).
[57] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson,
C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. Vander-
Plas, S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, “JAX: com-
posable transformations of Python+NumPy programs,”
(2018).
[58] P. Th¨ ornig, Journal of large-scale research facilities JL-
SRF 7 (2021), 10.17815/jlsrf-7-182.
Supplementary Material for:
Can neural quantum states learn volume-law ground states?
Giacomo Passetti, 1 Damian Hofmann, 2 Pit Neitemeier, 1
Lukas Grunwald,1, 2 Michael A. Sentef, 3, 2 and Dante M. Kennes 1, 2
1Institut f¨ ur Theorie der Statistischen Physik, RWTH Aachen University and
JARA-Fundamentals of Future Information Technology, 52056 Aachen, Germany
2Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Center for
Free-Electron Laser Science (CFEL), Luruper Chaussee 149, 22761 Hamburg, Germany
3H H Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom
I. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
A fully-connected feed-forward network (FFNN) is a composition of µ∈ N>0 layers where the lth network layer,
1≤l≤µ, applies the transformation (writing [n] :={1,...,n } for any n∈ N>0)
z(l)
i =
∑
j
W (l)
ij y(l)
j +b(l)
i , y (l+1)
i =φ(z(l)
i )
{
i∈ [L], j∈ [αL], l = 1,
i,j ∈ [αL], l> 1,
(S1)
from input y(l) to output signal y(l+1). This is an aﬃne transformation with weight matrix (or kernel) W (l), bias
b(l), and a nonlinear activation function φ. The full set of network parameters, consisting of all weights and biases, is
denoted by θ∈ CNpar. For the results presented in the main text, we have used the SELU activation function
SELU(x) =λ
{
x, x> 0,
(a− 1)ex, x ≤ 0 (S2)
(whereλ≈ 1.0507 anda≈ 1.6733), as implemented in jax [1], which helps circumvent the vanishing gradient problem
of training deep networks [2]. Since in our case the network acts on complex-valued signals, we apply SELU separately
to real and imaginary part of the input ( reim selu in netket [3]), giving the complex activation
φ(z) = SELU(Rez) +i SELU(Imz). (S3)
Using the hyperbolic tangent as activation provides equivalent or (for deep networks) worse results, as we discuss
below (Section III D). The log-probability amplitudes of the variational state are then obtained by performing the
logsumexp operation on the output of the ﬁnal layer, i.e.,
log⟨x|ψθ⟩ = log
(αL∑
i=1
exp(y(µ+1)
i )
)
, y (1)
i =xi, (S4)
with{|x⟩| x∈{ 0, 1}L} denoting the computational basis.
II. TRAINING PROTOCOL
A. Supervised learning
In this work we considered only system sizes up to L = 18, which are solvable via exact diagonalization (ED). We
solve the ED problem for a given realization of the model ˆHsyk(J), ﬁnding the corresponding ground state |ψGS(J)⟩.
The key result of this work, the exponential scaling of the required network size to reach a speciﬁc error bound, is
independent from the speciﬁc J realization for the couplings of the SYK model. This has been checked by performing
the full analysis as described in the following paragraphs for two independent realizations of the random coupling
matrix J.
arXiv:2212.02204v2  [quant-ph]  15 Dec 2022
2
FIG. S1. Relative energy error δE as function of [(a), (b), (c)] the network width α and of [(d), (e), (f)] the number of layer µ
for several system sizes and random initializations after [(a), (d)] 5 × 104, [(b), (e)] 10 5, and [(c), (f)] 2× 105 simulation steps,
respectively. Here we report the full dataset from which the average value plotted in the main text has been derived. The color
of each set of data points corresponds to the system size L as indicated in the legend while diﬀerent shades of the same color
belong to independent realizations of the initial network weights.
Given the ED solution |ψGS⟩, it is possible to train the network to reproduce the correct probability amplitudes
(up to norm and phase gauge freedoms) via supervised learning [4]. In practice, we have done so by optimizing the
loss function
δO(θ,J ) = 1−
⏐⏐⏐⏐
⟨ψθ|ψGS(J)⟩
⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩
⏐⏐⏐⏐ (S5)
using the Adam optimizer [5]. Another training scheme can be implemented by directly minimizing the expected
energy E(θ,J ) =⟨ ˆHsyk(J)⟩|ψθ⟩ of the system as the loss function. For this loss function, it is possible to extend the
training to system sizes beyond the reach of ED studies through variational Monte Carlo (VMC) sampling [6], which
is not possible in the SL scheme employed here due to its reliance on the knowledge of the full solution vector. Since
all our system sizes could be treated via full summation, we have not relied on VMC sampling in this work.
As our goal is to ﬁnd the network size required to represent the SYK ground states at a given system size, we
have compared training runs for both SL and energy minimization routines, ﬁnding the SL to be the best performing
choice in the regime under consideration (compare Section III B). Therefore, we have selected the SL results for
presentation in the main text. Our observations regarding the exponential scaling of required network size hold also
for the variational energy optimization runs.
The optimization problem for a neural network is challenging on its own and there is unfortunately no general way
to systematically identify the best choice of hyperparameters. Here, we have chosen to study the scaling with regard
to width α and depth µ of the network by performing two sets of runs: Varying the width for a two-layer network
and varying the depth of a network of ﬁxed width α = 4. Considering the trajectory of weights {θ(t)}t∈[tmax] (where
[tmax] :={1,...,t max}⊆ N) over the sequence of optimization steps, we can the deﬁne the optimal energy relative
error as δEmin(θ,J ) = mint∈[tmax]E(θ(t),J ). In Fig. S1 we report δEmin for SL protocols for three diﬀerent number
of total iterations tmax as function of α. All the data reported in this plot have been obtained with µ = 2, keeping
the learning rate of the Adam optimizer constant throughout all the simulation. From this analysis we can make
3
FIG. S2. (a) Relative energy error δE as function of the iteration step for shallow networks with µ = 2 layers and width α
as reported in the respective panels. The system size is L = 16. In light blue we report the raw data, in dark blue the result
of a window smoothing ﬁlter applied to the raw data. (b) Absolute value of the numerical derivative |∂(δE)
∂t |. (c) Estimated
minimum number of steps required to convergence t∗
min as deﬁned by Eq. (S6).
two relevant observations. The ﬁrst is that up to the network sizes simulated there is a monotonic improvement of
the error with increasing width α. The second observation is that at each ﬁxed number of simulation steps there is
an exponential scaling of the αmin required to bring δEmin below an arbitrary threshold (10−3 in our example) as a
function of the system size. With the data reported in this paragraph, it cannot be ruled out that this exponential
cost in network size is due to an exponential scaling of the number of steps required to bring the small α values to
convergence. However, through an analysis of the training curves it is possible to make a strong argument to identify
the αmin discussed in the main text as a quantity independent from the number of training steps. This analysis is
explained in the following section.
B. Truncation scheme
In the ﬁrst row of Fig. S2, we reportδE(θ(t),J ) for four diﬀerent alpha values distributed around what we are going
to deﬁne as the critical αmin. The light blue line corresponds to the raw data obtained from the training process. In
order to remove the ﬂuctuations around the moving average, we apply a ﬂat window ﬁlter over the raw error, obtaining
the proﬁle corresponding to the dark blue line. This running average error is smooth and monotonically decreasing.
Furthermore, the slope of these curves is also decreasing (in absolute value), implying a slowing rate of convergence of
the optimization. In order to conserve computational resources, we truncate the runs that are expected to converge
to a δE(θ,J ) above the energy threshold of 10−3 based on the following criterion: Assuming that the absolute value
of the slope is monotonically decreasing throughout all the training iterations, it is possible to estimate, at any step
4
FIG. S3. (a) Overlap⟨Ψθ|Ψexact(J)⟩ and (b) relative energy errorδE for a training protocol in the interval t∈ [4×105, 5×105]
steps. The same pre-trained network here it has been updated with the three diﬀerent learning ratios reported in the legend.
t, a lower bound for the number of steps required to reach the error threshold as
t∗
min(t) = δE(θ(t),J )−δE threshold
|∂tδE(θ(t),J )| . (S6)
Within the assumption of constant slope, the equality δE(θ(t +t∗
min(t)),J ) = δE threshold holds. If now we deﬁne a
control interval ∆t big enough to average out the noise around training curve, one can check if a candidate run is
trending towards convergence below the error threshold based on the slope of t∗
min(t),
δt∗
min(t) = t∗
min(t + ∆t)−t∗
min(t)
∆t . (S7)
The runs that are expected to reach convergence are those that satisfy
δt∗
min(t + ∆t)<δt∗
min(t). (S8)
We simulated all runs for at least tmax = 2× 105, for those runs that where still above the threshold for that step
we used the criterion (S8) (with ∆ t = 10 5) in order to assess whether they can still be expected to reach the error
threshold, based on their current rate of convergence. The runs for which converge below the threshold was ruled out
by our criterion were stopped in order to conserve computational resources, while we did perform additional blocks
of 10 5 steps for the remaining simulations, until the truncation criterion (S8) did apply or the error threshold was
reached. The resulting αmin values reported in Fig. 4 of the main text are the smallest simulated value of α for which
convergence below the threshold was reached. The µ scaling analysis was performed in an equivalent way.
III. OVERVIEW OF ALTERNATIVE TRAINING METHODS INVESTIGATED
In the previous paragraphs we have described the protocol and data analysis necessary to reproduce the results
that we discussed in the main text. Here we are showing alternatives to the training scheme and hyperparameters.
The alternatives which we have tested achieved either worse accuracy or no signiﬁcant improvement compared to the
results we selected for the main text.
A. Diﬀerent learning rate
We have used the Adam optimizer using a constant learning rate throughout the simulations reported in the main
text. One advantage of Adam with respect to SGD is that it automatically adapts the step size based on the history
of loss gradients. Still, Adam has to be initialized with a speciﬁc learning rate and this can potentially inﬂuence
the eﬀectiveness of the training. While determining the optimal learning rate for our simulations, we have also tried
5
FIG. S4. Minimum relative energy errorδEmin obtained using the SL (green) and a VOE (red) loss functions usingtmax = 5×104
steps as function of the number of network width α. For the data reported in this plot, we considered system size L = 18 and
a ﬁxed µ = 2
FIG. S5. Minimum relative energy error δEmin obtained during a SL training protocol of a deep FFNN (green) and of a
Network with Skipped connections (red) with a number of steps set to tmax = 5× 104 as function of the number of network
laters µ. For the data reported in this plot we considered system size L = 18 and a ﬁxed α = 4
schemes involving an update of the learning rate during the simulation. We report an example of an unconverged
training curve in Fig. S3 for which, after 4 · 105 steps at a ﬁxed learning rate, we performed further 10 5 steps with
three diﬀerent adjusted learning rates. These changes of learning rate did not result in an improvement of training
performance.
B. Variational energy optimization
Beside the SL protocol described above, we have also considered directly optimizing the variational energy
E(θ,J ) =⟨ψθ| ˆHsyk(J)|ψθ⟩
⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩ . (S9)
For disambiguation, we refer to this loss function as the variationally optimized energy (VOE). Note that this loss
does not involve the ED solution of the model and can be applied to system sizes beyond those limits, if it is used
together with MC sampling of the quantum states [6]. However, as we are interested in comparing the performance of
the SL and VOE protocols in the ED regime, we only use the loss (S9) obtained by full summation in the following.
Within the parameter range tested, the SL protocol achieved systematically lower errors than the VOE loss. As an
example of this, we show in Fig. S4 the resulting δEmin for a given system size ( L = 18) and a ﬁxed number of
iteration steps. Although the trend is similar between the two curves, the SL reaches the convergence threshold at
lowerα values.
6
FIG. S6. Relative energy error δE as function of the iteration step t using the SL training protocol with SELU (light blue) and
tanh (light green) activation functions. The ﬁgure shows the data for (a) L = 14, µ = 2; (b) L = 16, µ = 6; and (c) L = 18,
µ = 10.
C. Deep networks with skip connections
In the main part of this work, we presented an extensive discussion of the results obtained when training a FFNN
with the architecture deﬁned in Section I. Among the two diﬀerent hyperparameter dependencies discussed there, the
number of layers µ scaling requires some extra attention. It is known that while adding more layers enhances the
networks expressive capability, at the same time it can make the training more diﬃcult [7]. One common remedy to
this is the addition of skip connections between the layers of the neural network [8]. We report in Fig. S5 a comparison
between the training at a ﬁxed number of iteration steps tmax = 5· 104 between the FFNN discussed in the main
text and a fully-connected network with skip connections. Speciﬁcally, our network is divided into nB blocks, each
containing 𝓁 layers. The total number of layers is thus µ = nB𝓁. After the application of each block (i.e., after
applying𝓁 fully-connected layers), the content of the original input layer (with the ﬁrst aﬃne transformation applied)
is added to the output before it is passed to the following block. For the SL simulation runs considered (Fig. S5),
this architecture does not give an improvement in energy error when compared to a simple FFNN. We have found
improved convergence (compared to the simple FFNN) of the skip connection networks in some runs using the VOE
loss. However, in those cases the number of layers already exceeded the critical µ (around which the network with
skip connections still performed worse), so no improvement with regard to compression was obtained this way.
D. Hyperbolic tangent activation function
As already stated, for all the data discussed in the main part, the FFNN implemented where following the deﬁnition
presented in Eq. (S1) using SELU as activation function φ. While in principle there are many viable choices with
regard to which speciﬁc activation function utilizing, we opted to restrict our studies to a particular activation in order
to investigate extensively the dependence of the representability power as function of the network hyperparameters,
keeping a manageable number of simulations to perform. Thus the need to choose an activation function able to
achieve reliable performance when dealing with both deep and shallow networks. We present here a comparison of the
performances achieved by the same training protocol and network architecture while using another common activation
function, the hyperbolic tangent. In Fig. S6, we present training proﬁles for the relative energy error δE as function
of the iteration step t. We show this for both a network with SELU and a network with tanh activation function for
several numbers of layers µ. As one could expect from the vanishing gradient problem that eﬀects tanh, we observe
that also for the network sizes relevant to our problem, above a certain number of layers the tanh activated networks
are not able to improve the energy error anymore. At the same time SELU displayed a monotonic improvement of
7
FIG. S7. Bipartite entanglement entropy averaged over 4 independent realizations of the SYK model (error bar shows the
standard deviation) compared to bipartite entanglement of a random state given by the Page value (red).
the energy error with the number of layers (up to scales relevant for our speciﬁc problem) and thus is an eﬀective
choice (compare Fig. S1).
IV. SYK BIPARTITE ENTANGLEMENT
Following the standard deﬁnition, the bipartite entanglement of a density matrix ρ corresponds to
Sbipartite =−Tr [ρA log (ρA)] =−Tr [ρB log (ρB)] (S10)
where ρA(B) = TrB(A) [ρ] is the reduced density matrix obtained from the density matrix ρ and tracing over the
degrees of the subpartition B(A) of the total hilbert space, in the special case of dim( A) = dim(B). We compare
the Sbipartite scaling for four independent ﬁnite size SYK model realizations together with the Page value [9], that
quantiﬁes the entanglement for a pure random state. In the special case case of bipartite entanglement, the page
value is
Spage =N log(2)− 1
2. (S11)
As one can see in Fig. S7, the entanglement scaling of the SYK model follows a volume law scaling that does not
saturate the page value, showing that the SYK states exhibit structure beyond a pure random state.
V. NETWORK COMPRESSION
Trained neural networks can be amenable to compression in order to reduce the total number of parameters. This
is usually done for the purpose of reducing memory and computational requirements in order to run a network on
a lower powered device. Here, we have explored a compression scheme based on a lower-rank approximation of the
weight matrices in each layer [10] in order to gauge whether any potential redundancy in the learned variational
parameters can be identiﬁed this way. This is done by performing a singular value decomposition (SVD)
W (l) =U (l)S(l)V (l) (S12)
whereU (l),V (l) are unitary matrices and S(l) = diag(σ(l)
1 ,...,σ (l)
M ) is the matrix of singular values σ(l)
1 ≥... ≥σ(l)
M≥
0. We truncate this spectrum by discarding all singular values below a threshold λ relative to the largest singular
value, i.e., based on the criterion σ(l)
i /σ(l)
1 < λ.For simplicity, we chose λ uniformly for each layer. As a measure of
the approximation error, we report in Fig. S8 the relative energy error after truncation as a function of the fraction
q = singular values retained
total singular values (S13)
of singular values retained over all weight matrices of the network for diﬀerent system sizes and choices of hyper-
parameters. This data shows that already a limited amount of truncation (0 .95≤ q < 1.0) results in a signiﬁcant
8
FIG. S8. Relative energy error as a function of the fraction of retained singular values q for four diﬀerent choices of
hyperparameters indicated in the title of each panel. The color corresponds to diﬀerent network initializations as in Fig. S1.
increase in energy error. We therefore conclude that at uniform SVD truncation of the weight matrices does not reveal
redundancy in our learned SYK ground states.
[1] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas,
S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs (2018).
[2] G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, A. Mayr, and S. Hochreiter, Self-normalizing neural networks (2017), arXiv:1706.02515.
[3] F. Vicentini, D. Hofmann, A. Szab´ o, D. Wu, C. Roth, C. Giuliani, G. Pescia, J. Nys, V. Vargas-Calder´ on, N. Astrakhantsev,
and G. Carleo, NetKet 3: Machine Learning Toolbox for Many-Body Quantum Systems, SciPost Phys. Codebases , 7 (2022).
[4] B. J´ onsson, B. Bauer, and G. Carleo, Neural-network states for the classical simulation of quantum computing (2018).
[5] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization (2014), arXiv:1412.6980.
[6] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artiﬁcial neural networks, Science 355, 602
(2017).
[7] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2016) pp. 770–778.
[8] H. Li, Z. Xu, G. Taylor, C. Studer, and T. Goldstein, Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets, in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018,
December 3-8, 2018, Montr´ eal, Canada, edited by S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi,
and R. Garnett (2018) pp. 6391–6401.
[9] D. N. Page, Average entropy of a subsystem, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1291 (1993).
[10] J. Xue, J. Li, and Y. Gong, Restructuring of deep neural network acoustic models with singular value decomposition, in
Interspeech 2013 (ISCA, 2013).