HamLib:  A library of Hamiltonians for benchmarking quantum
                                         algorithms and hardware

  Nicolas PD Sawaya∗1,2, Daniel Marti-Dafcik3, Yang Ho4, Daniel P Tabor5, David E
 Bernal Neira6,7,8, Alicia B Magann4, Shavindra Premaratne9, Pradeep Dubey2, Anne
  Matsuura9, Nathan Bishop10, Wibe A de Jong11, Simon Benjamin12, Ojas Parekh4,
                  Norm M Tubman6, Katherine Klymko†13, and Daan Camps‡13

                                      1Azulene Labs, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA
                                          2Intel Labs, Santa Clara, CA 95054, USA
          3Physical & Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QZ, UK
                             4Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185, USA
               5Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA
                             6NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
                     7Universities Space Research Association, Mountain View, CA 94035, USA
        8Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
                                            9Intel Labs, Hillsboro, OR 97124, USA
                                      10Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR 97124, USA
                             11Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Berkeley, California 94720
                       12Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PH, UK
13National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
                                                   Berkeley, CA 94720, USA





                                                             Abstract
           In  order  to  characterize  and  benchmark  computational  hardware,  software,  and  algorithms,
       it  is  essential  to  have  many  problem  instances  on-hand.  This  is  no  less  true  for  quantum  com-
       putation, where a large collection of real-world problem instances would allow for benchmarking
       studies  that  in  turn  help  to  improve  both  algorithms  and  hardware  designs.   To  this  end,  here
       we  present  a  large  dataset  of  qubit-based  quantum  Hamiltonians.   The  dataset,  called  HamLib
       (for Hamiltonian Library), is freely available online and contains problem sizes ranging from 2 to
       1000 qubits.  HamLib includes problem instances of the Heisenberg model, Fermi-Hubbard model,
       Bose-Hubbard  model,  molecular  electronic  structure,  molecular  vibrational  structure,  MaxCut,
       Max-k-SAT, Max-k-Cut, QMaxCut, and the traveling salesperson problem.  The goals of this ef-
       fort  are  (a)  to  save  researchers  time  by  eliminating  the  need  to  prepare  problem  instances  and
       map them to qubit representations, (b) to allow for more thorough tests of new algorithms and
       hardware, and (c) to allow for reproducibility and standardization across research studies.

Contents

1   Scope and Preliminaries                                                                                              2
    1.1    Motivation    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    2
    1.2    Attributes of this library .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    4
    1.3    Related work   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    5
    1.4    Availability and dataset structure .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    5
    1.5    Modifications to and extensions of HamLib   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    6

   ∗nicolas@azulenelabs.com
   †kklymko@lbl.gov
   ‡dcamps@lbl.gov





                                                                   1
2   Problem instances                                                                                                        7
     2.1    Binary-variable optimization and related problems   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    7
             2.1.1    MaxCut  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    7
             2.1.2    Max-k-SAT  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    8
             2.1.3    QMaxCut  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    9
     2.2    Discrete-variable (d> 2) optimization problems  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
             2.2.1    Max-k-Cut   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
             2.2.2    Traveling Salesperson Problem   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
     2.3    Condensed matter physics models .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11
             2.3.1    Transverse-field Ising model  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11
             2.3.2    Heisenberg model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
             2.3.3    Fermi-Hubbard model  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
             2.3.4    Bose-Hubbard model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
     2.4    Chemistry  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
             2.4.1    Electronic structure   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
             2.4.2    Vibrational structure .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14

3   Benchmarking discussion                                                                                           15
     3.1    Benchmarking quantum algorithms  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16
     3.2    Benchmarking quantum hardware .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17
     3.3    Benchmarking compilation and the full stack   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17

4   Concluding remarks                                                                                                   18

A  HamLib code snippets                                                                                               35
     A.1   Loading HDF5 file structure .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  35
     A.2   Loading HDF5 data   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  36
     A.3   Loading and unzipping to memory   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  37
     A.4   Operator manipulation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  37

B  Qubit Hamiltonian metadata distributions for subdatasets                                       38

C  Number of frozen electrons                                                                                        38

D  Resonances in vibrational Hamiltonians                                                                    39

1    Scope and Preliminaries
1.1    Motivation
Large  datasets  of  problem  instances  have  long  been  useful  for  the  analysis  of  computer  hardware,
software, and algorithms.  For instance, ImageNet [DDS+09] is a massive repository of images that has
facilitated the testing of many deep learning packages.  Another example is computational chemistry
and materials science,  where extensive datasets (e.g.  the Protein Data Bank [BWF+00],  the Mate-
rials Project [JOH+13] and QM9 [RDRVL14]) improve ease of testing new algorithms and software
approaches,  while  providing  standardization  across  the  field.   Well-defined  datasets  or  problem  in-
stances may in turn be used to define benchmarking suites such as MLPerf [MRC+20] and LINPACK
[DLP03, MB18].
     Though there has been progress in introducing benchmarks in the quantum computing community
[PWS+16, CFG+22, LSKA, LJV+21, CBG21, TGO+22], there is not yet a topically broad database of
problem instances.  Having such a dataset would be convenient for many reasons.  For instance, when
researchers wish to test a novel Hamiltonian simulation algorithm [Llo96, WBAG11, LC17, CST+21]
for  chemistry,  they  must  first  go  through  the  tedious  and  non-trivial  process  of  preparing  a  set  of
chemical Hamiltonians on their own.  It would be useful for the researcher to have these preparatory
steps  done  ahead  of  time,  so  that  they  may  spend  more  of  their  efforts  on  algorithm  or  hardware
design.




                                                                            2
Figure 1:  The four categories of qubit Hamiltonians included in HamLib.  In the area of chemistry we
include real-world accurate Hamiltonians for both electronic and vibrational structure.  The condensed
matter dataset includes four commonly studied models defined on a variety of lattice topologies, with
and without periodic boundary conditions.  We include Max-k-SAT and MaxCut in the binary combin-
torial problems, as well as QMaxCut, a quantum analogue with interesting mathematical properties.
For discrete combinatorics we include both Max-k-Cut and the traveling salesperson problem.


    There are three primary motivations behind creating a dataset of Hamiltonians with broad coverage
in application area and in problem difficulty.  First, such a library can save substantial labor time.  For
example, a researcher wanting to test their new quantum chemistry algorithms will not have to learn
the minutia of electronic structure, install and run various packages, choose a representative test set,
and debug inevitable software difficulties.  In turn, this allows for resources and time being devoted to
to the more interesting aspects of algorithm and software development.
    Second,  a  large  Hamiltonian  library  allows  for  more  thorough  testing.   For  example,  if  one  is
performing  numerical  tests  on  a  new  Hamiltonian  simulation  algorithm,  immediately  being  able  to
run it on a very broad class of problems (as opposed to only e.g.  a toy spin model and two to three
molecules) allows for a stronger understanding of when the algorithm performs well.
    Third, such a library allows for reproducibility and standardization across research studies.  It is
more straightforward to make fair comparisons between two algorithms if they are benchmarked using
the exact same problem sets.
    In order to facilitate practical benchmarking of quantum algorithms, software, and hardware, in this
work we introduce an extensive dataset of many quantum problem Hamiltonians from a variety of fields
related to condensed matter physics, chemistry, and classical optimization. We call the dataset HamLib
(for Hamiltonian Library) version 1.  We focus primarily on presenting a wide range of Hamiltonians
that may be used in various contexts; the definition of proper benchmarks—which generally require
defining  both  a  problem  and  an  algorithm  in  addition  to  a  dataset—will  not  be  our  primary  goal.
However, we include broad discussion of benchmarking in Section 3.




                                                              3
1.2    Attributes of this library
There were several principles that guided the curation of this library.  Although choosing the contents
for any dataset is somewhat arbitrary,  we believe that HamLib’s contents are well-motivated,  while
showing exceptional breadth in terms of problem size, complexity, mathematical properties, and field
of study.
    We strive to create datasets that were “well-spaced” in terms of qubit counts.  This is important
for  multiple  reasons.   First,  strong  simulation  of  quantum  algorithms  cannot  be  performed  past  40
to  50  qubits;  hence  in  order  to  properly  study  scaling,  one  should  be  studying  problem  instances
for every  few qubits.  Even  for cases where  tensor networks  are used to simulate 100s of  qubits,  or
where quantum compilers are benchmarked on even more qubits, problem sizes in the context of early
quantum computing are still much smaller than typical classical datasets.  For instance, the classical
benchmark Graph 500 [MMB+10] contains graph problem instances of more than 1040 vertices. Second,
because current quantum hardware is still limited in size, small spacings are necessary in order to test
as much of the device as possible.  For instance, if an experimental quantum computer has exactly 24
qubits, we want to ensure that several problem instances from HamLib can be used to test the full
device.
    A main focus of HamLib is the curation of real-world problems, with parameters and properties as
similar as possible to those encountered in some real scientific or industrial applications.  We include
high-quality  and  meticulously  prepared  problems  in  molecular  electronic  structure  and  vibrational
structure, while also curating real-world datasets for combinatorial problems such as routing, by using
distance matrices from real cities [Rei91].  It is our suspicion that the reason many quantum algorithms
are often tested only on simpler condensed matter models or on random graphs is simply that it is
time-consuming to prepare problems that are more representative of the real world.  However, lattice
models and random instances are equally vital for benchmarking and scientific understanding, and as
such much of our dataset consists of toy problems as well.
    Another  essential  facet  of  HamLib  is  that  all  problem  instances  have  already  been  mapped  to
qubits, i.e.  they have already been mapped to a Pauli representation of the form
                                                                     O
                                               Hencoded =X        ci     {σik}                                                       (1)
                                                               i      k
where σik is a one-qubit Pauli or identity operator, i.e. σik∈{I,X,Y,Z}, and ci is a real scalar.  It is
our hope that this eliminates substantial labor for some researchers.  The user can simply download the
qubit representations and immediately use them in a qubit-based computer or simulator.  However,
we  caution  against  a  black  box  approach.   It  will  often  be  important  to  understand  the  difference
between (for example) the various fermion-to-qubit mappings or the various integer-to-qubit mappings,
before interpreting the results of a particular benchmark.  The original “unencoded” Hamiltonians are
included  where  appropriate,  so  that  the  user  can  implement  alternative  encoding  approaches  not
considered here.  Further, some auxiliary information is included, such as approximate ground states
or operators that aid in implementing certain quantum algorithms.
    We attempt to achieve broad coverage in terms of the mathematical properties of the Hamiltonians.
A broad range of localities (i.e.  Pauli weights) are present, as the many mapping choices for fermionic,
vibrational, bosonic, and combinatorial problems lead to localities of anywhere from 2 to N, whereN
is the number of qubits.  Qubit connectivites vary widely as well, as we consider many graph types
for combinatorial problems, and several grid dimensionalities and types in condensed matter.  Finally,
we note that a broad range of Hamiltonian norms are present—this is important because the formal
complexity  of  many  algorithms  (especially  in  Hamiltonian  simulation  [CST+21,  LSTT23])  depend
explicitly on such norms.
    A main use case we have in mind for this dataset is comparing quantum approaches against each
other,  not  just  comparing  quantum  algorithms/computers  to  classical  ones.   Hence  there  are  entire
problem  classes  for  which  the  task  is  either  certain  or  likely  to  scale  polynomially  on  a  classical
computer (e.g.  ground state finding for the 1D transverse-field Ising model)—such problem instances
are still useful for quantum-to-quantum comparisons for quantum algorithms, quantum compilers, and
quantum computers.  However, for many portions of HamLib, it would certainly be a reasonable use of
the dataset to compare scaling behavior in quantum versus classical methods, and we encourage this
as use case as well.



                                                               4
    Some  comments  are  merited  on  why  certain  problem  areas  are  not  included  in  HamLib.   We
have focused exclusively on problems that are commonly represented as Hamiltonians, largely for the
purpose of saving time for researchers. For instance, quantum machine learning for classical data as well
as partial differential equations are not included [JWM15, AKWL19, LC20, LJM+20, XSE+21, SSM21,
CLO21, CVH+22, ACB+22, JS23, BPLC+23], because most implementations of such algorithms do
not in fact first map the data to a qubit-based Hamiltonian.  This is an important research area that
will require its own curated high-quality datasets, and some work has already been done in this area
[PYF21].

1.3    Related work
Benchmarking  for  classical  computing  has  matured  over  many  decades.   Perhaps  the  most  promi-
nent large-scale linear algebra benchmark is LINPACK [DLP03, MB18], though widely used classical
benchmarking standards exist, including MLPerf [MRC+20], SPEC [Dix91], HPCG [DLH13], Green500
[FC07], and Graph500 [MMB+10].  More analogous to the current work are past efforts constructing
large datasets that can be used in various benchmarking tasks.  For instance, as mentioned above, Ima-
geNet [DDS+09] contains millions of images intended for use in image analysis and deep learning, while
similarly large datasets exist for simulating chemistry [RDRVL14] and materials science [JOH+13].
    In recent years there have been several proposals for benchmarking quantum algorithms and quan-
tum  computers.   Perhaps  most  similar  to  previous  classical  benchmarking  efforts  are  the  proposed
benchmark suites consisting of common quantum subroutines, such as quantum phase estimation and
quantum adders [PWS+16, CFG+22, LSKA, LJV+21, CBG21, TGO+22].  Benchmarks have been pro-
posed specifically for near-term hybrid quantum-classical algorithms [YAGJ+21, MPJ+19, WRV+23],
with some benchmarking work concentrating on more specific topics, such as particular classical op-
timization  problems  [MAAM21,  FRH+22,  LCM+23],  benchmarking  the  optimizer  used  in  the  clas-
sical  step  of  hybrid  algorithms  [MRBAG16,  GS17,  SMM22],  a  dataset  used  for  quantum  machine
learning  [PYF21],  and  the  dataset  of  curated  Hamiltonians  available  in  the  software  package  Pen-
nylane  [BIS+18].   Narrower  benchmarks  have  been  proposed  for  very  specific  applications  as  well
[KLMT00, HWPC05, ZKE+19, YADM+19, EHW+20, DDSG+20, RK21, DL21, NMP+23].  Other pro-
posals include those related to quantum volume [CBS+19, MGE12], random benchmarking [KLR+08],
and  related  techniques  [EWP+19,  PRY+22];  such  efforts  are  not  associated  with  specific  quantum
algorithms but are an essential aspect of hardware characterization and design.
    Despite the above-mentioned progress, there is not yet a large publicly available dataset of quantum
Hamiltonians (i.e.  cost functions) for benchmarking algorithmic implementations e.g.  QPE, adiabatic
quantum computing, VQE, and QAOA. The purpose of the current work is to fill this gap.

1.4    Availability and dataset structure
At the time of publication, the HamLib dataset is downloadable from the following URL:

                          https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/m888/dcamps/hamlib/

The Hamiltonians are organized into the following high-level categories:

    •  Binary-variable optimization and related problems.  Subcategories are Max-k-SAT, Max-
      Cut, and QMaxCut.

    •  Discrete-variable optimization problems (discrete variables taking > 2 values).  Subcate-
      gories are Max-k-Cut and the traveling salesperson problem.

    •  Condensed matter physics models commonly studied by theoretical physicists.  Subcategories
      are the transverse-field Ising, Heisenberg, Fermi-Hubbard, and Bose-Hubbard models.

    •  Chemistry Hamiltonians that use curated or calculated real-world parameters.  Subcategories
      are electronic structure and vibrational structure.

    As  stated  above,  a  major  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  provide  a  large  set  of  Hamiltonians  that
have already been mapped to a qubit representation.  All encoded Hamiltonians are represented using
OpenFermion’s QubitOperator class [MRS+20] and stored in the HDF5 format.  These are compressed


                                                            5
Figure  2:Distribution  of  the  number  of  qubits  (   left),  number  of  terms  (middle),  and  one  norms
(right) over all qubit Hamiltonians in HamLib.


to ZIP format.  Please  note, it will not be unusual for the decompression to yield an HDF5 file that
is an order of magnitude larger than the ZIP file.  We provide a few Python code snippets useful to
interact with the HamLib datasetin the ‘            hamlib   snippets.py’ file available via the URL linked above
and summarizedin Appendix A.Figure 2 shows the distribution of the number of qubits, the number
of  terms,  and  the  one-norms  of  the  more  than  1.5  million  qubit  Hamiltonians  that  are  included  in
HamLib.  Appendix B includes similar plots for each of the four subdatasets.
    It  is  important  to  point  out  that  for  some  of  these  Hamiltonians,  minimization  (e.g.   minimum
eigenvalue finding) is a typical goal, while for others maximization (e.g.  maximum eigenvalue finding)
is  more  natural.   We  point  this  out  this  for  any  researcher  considering  running  the  entire  dataset
through a set of algorithms in a black-box manner.
    In addition to the qubit representations of the operators herein,  we include files for the original
“pre-encoded” (before having been encoded into qubit representation) Hamiltonians where appropriate.
This  may  take  the  format  of  a  mat2qubit,  OpenFermion,  or  SciPy  array  object  as  specified  in  the
relevant sections of this document.  Where appropriate, other auxiliary data is included, e.g.  graph
instances or approximate ground state values.  If such auxiliary data is present for a given subset then
this is mentioned in the relevant portion of Section 2.
    In  Hamiltonians  with  non-binary  and  non-fermionic  variables,  the  correspondence  between  the
qubit indices and the original variable indices can be determined as follows.
    Smaller variables indices in the original variables space correspond to smaller variable indices in
qubit  space.For  example,  if     y0  and y1  are  8-valued  variables  encoded  with  standard  binary,  then
qubit indices{0,1,2} correspond to y0 and qubit indices{3,4,5} correspond to y1.  Further, within an
encoded discrete variable the least significant figures correspond to the smaller qubit index.  Hence
y0 = q020 +q121 +q222, where qi  is the value of the ith bit.  In other words, we follow little-endian
convention to store each individual variable and order variables in ascending order in qubit space.
    We provide an additional example for clarity.  Assume we have variables x0, x1, and x2, all with
cardinalities  4  and  encoded  with  standard  binary.  The  state x0  =  2→  102, x1  =  1→  012,  and
x2  =  0→  002  (subscript  denoting  binary  representation)  corresponds  to  the  quantum  basis  states
01-10-00, where the hyphen - is included to visually separate the 3 variables.  The same example in
unary (one-hot) representation for which x0  = 2→ 01002, x1  = 1→ 00102,  and x2  = 0→ 00012,
becomes 0100-0010-0001.

1.5    Modifications to and extensions of HamLib
We believe that, for the purposes of this project, it is best to maintain  static  datasets.  This allows
comparisons between research papers to be as valid as possible over the years.  However, there are of
course many other problem types that could have been included in this dataset, including e.g.  those
related to high energy physics or nuclear structure.  Hence future modifications to HamLib will likely
take the form of additional datasets, whether e.g.  adding new distinct subsets of electronic structure
Hamiltonians,  or adding subsets for entirely new problem areas.  Additionally there is some chance
that some modifications will be made to the first version of the dataset.


                                                               6
    Thecurrentversion of the dataset is denoted HamLib v1.1.  If modifications are made to HamLib,
we will assign a new version number to the changes, and include a full description of the changes or
additions in the present section of this manuscript.  HamLib versions:

    •  v1.0 - June 2023 - Initial release of HamLib.

    •  v1.1 - September 2024 - Updates:

          –  All qubit Hamiltonians have the attributes ‘nqubits’, ‘terms’ and ‘one                   norm’ as metadata
             attached in the HDF5 files.
          –  70- and 80-atom electronic structure hydrogen chains have been removed.
          –  All (sub)datasets include a CSV file with a list of all problem instances and their Hamiltonian
             statistics (number of qubits, number of terms, and one norm).
          –  All (sub)datasets include histograms showing the distribution of number of qubits, number
             of terms and one norms of the Hamiltonians.
          –  Added support for qiskit’s SparsePauliOp Hamiltonian format.
          –  Minor fixes and improved file consistency across HamLib.

2    Problem instances

2.1    Binary-variable optimization and related problems
This section includes combinatorial problems defined over binary variables. We consider MaxCut, Max-
k-SAT, and QMaxCut, a local Hamiltonian problem that is a quantum analogue of MaxCut.  We make
a point of using problem instances from established libraries used in classical benchmarking, as well
as random graphs we constructed for this work.  For the former classes of graphs, where appropriate,
we have implemented variable reduction schemes whereby smaller problem instances are created from
the large original instances [HV02, DCD+06, LMS12].  The purpose of these problem reductions is to
ensure that the qubits counts are well-spaced as discussed in Section 1.2, while retaining some of the
structure of the original problem instance.

2.1.1    MaxCut
The prototypical classical problem to which NISQ algorithms (especially QAOA) are applied is the
MaxCut problem, for which the cost function is defined as

                                             HC = X           1
                                                     (j,k)∈E  2 (1−ZjZk),                                                      (2)

whereE is the set of edges in the graphG.  MaxCut is a commonly studied graph partitioning problem,
which in turn has applications in many domains.  In addition, MaxCut (the optimization version) is a
classic NP-hard problem.
    In HamLib we include a set of trivially 2-colorable graphs, which may be useful for sanity checks—
i.e.  if a quantum algorithm cannot find the optimum for these trivial graphs then it may indicate a
pathology in the algorithm.  These are the complete bipartite graphs (with partition sizes a and b),
star graphs, and circulant graphs.
    We  constructed  two  general  types  of  random  graphs.   First  are  random X-regular  graphs  for
regularities 3,4,5,6.  Additionally, we include Erdos-Renyi graphs GNP(n,p), wherep is the probability
that  a  given  edge  is  present.   Though  previous  work  in  quantum  algorithms  has  studied  the  case
of  GNP(n,  dn−1)  for  fixed  parameter d  [FGG20,  BM21],  we  have  chosen  not  to  use  this  graph  class
because nearly all such graphs are disconnected [ER+60].  We instead implement GNP(n,k lnnn  ) for
fixed parameter k, which for k > 1.0 is virtually guaranteed to be a connected graph [ER+60].  For
these constructed graphs we include variable counts of:  4 to 10 (step 1); 10 to 48 (step 2); 50 to 200
(step 10); 300 to 1000 (step 100).  These instances are used in Max-k-Cut and QMaxCut as well.
    Finally, we derive graphs from Biq Mac [Wie07], a library that is widely used in classical bench-
marking,  and  CI-QuBe  [TG21],  a  collection  of  combinatorial  instances  for  quantum  benchmarking.


                                                             7
Biq Mac contains two classes of instances:  the Ising instances are lattice graphs taken from statistical
physics and the ‘rudy’ instances are generated from the rudy graph generator.  From CI-QuBe we used
the Karloff [Kar96] and ratio912 data sets.  Karloff shows that there is a sequence of graphs whose
Goemans-Williamson (GW) approximation ratio approaches 0.878; these are the graphs at the begin-
ning of such a sequence using the construction Karloff proposes.  The ratio912 graphs are graphs in
the MQLIB instance library [DGS18] that have a 0.912 approximation ratio with respect to GW. For
these instances, the optimal cut is always 2/3 of the total number of edges.  These GW approximations
provide some insight into the hardness of each dataset.
    The goal of the problem reductions is to preserve much of the structure of the original Biq Mac and
CI-QuBe graphs, ensure the resulting reduced graphs are connected, and ensure that the instances are
well-spaced in terms of qubit counts.  To this end, we use two variable reduction methods to generate
instances with arbitrary node counts.  The first is random restriction [HV02, JN08, LMS12] where we
randomly  partition  a  sample  of  vertices  (i.e.   we  reduce  the  graph  by  removing  already  partitioned
vertices).  The second is a random walk [DCD+06] method that creates a randomly connected sub-
graph.  We initially attempt to use random restriction, but in cases where the random restriction is
unable to create a sufficient number of connected instances, we use the random walk method.
    The following table summarizes the graphs used for the HamLib instances of MaxCut.

      Trivial graphs        2-colorable graphs:  Complete bipartite, star, circulant with offsets{1,2}.
      Random                X-Reg with X∈{3, 4, 5, 6}, and GNP(n,k lnnn  )with k∈{2, 3, 4, 5}.
      Biq Mac lib           Variable reduction method:  random restriction and random walk.  (Ising and
                            Rudy)
      CI-QuBe               Variable reduction method:  random restriction and random walk.  (Karloff
      [TG21]                and ratio912)
      (Auxiliary)           Graph instances

2.1.2    Max-k-SAT
In  addition  to  being  relevant  to  industrial  optimization,  satisfiability  problems  form  the  basis  for
much of theoretical computer science.  Specifically, 3-SAT is often used for complexity theoretic proofs
[AB09], partly because any NP-Hard problem can be cast as a 3-SAT problem.
    Constructing a Hamiltonian to represent a 3-SAT problem involves summing 3-variable terms such
as


                                  xi∨xj∨xk =I− 18(I +Zi)(I +Zj)(I +Zk)                                        (3)

if negations are not present.  When negations are included (as they are in HamLib), the expression is

              (¬)sixi∨ (¬)sjxj∨ (¬)skxk =I− 18[I + (−1)siZi][I + (−1)sjZj][I + (−1)skZk]             (4)

where sj = 1 if xj  is negated in the clause, else 0.
    From classical computer science,  it is known that the hardness of solving satisfiability problems
increases with the clause ratio r  = m/n,  where m is the number of clauses and n is the number of
variables.  Analytical and theoretical results exist which estimate or place bounds on the ratio r  at
which  a  problem  becomes  intractable  [ANP05].   In  quantum  computation  as  well,  researchers  have
studied hardness scaling in random SAT instances [APMB20, ZSZ22].
    Here,  we choose clause ratios (r∈{2, 3, 4, 5}) that cross the (both numerically and analytically
estimated)  thresholds  for  hardness  in  both  classical  [ANP05]  and  quantum  computational  studies
[APMB20, ZSZ22].  Implementing variable (qubit) counts n from 4 to 1000, for each (n,r) we create
10 random Hamiltonian instances.
    In addition to generating random instances, we also pull a sample collection of datasets from SATLib
[HS00].  We use the following datasets:  aim, lran, flat30, flat100, uf20-20, uf100-430, uf200-860, uf250-
1065,  uuf100-430,  uuf200-860,  and  uuf250-1065.   SATLib  is  a  representative  library  of  Max-k-SAT
instances that contains many satisfiable and unsatisfiable instances.  For variable reduction, we first
convert the clauses into a graph where each vertex represents a clause,  and an edge exists between
two vertices if the associated clauses share a variable.  Then we apply random restriction [JN08] to the


                                                              8
variables and give random assignments to a random sampling of variables.  As we remove variables and
clauses, we update the graph representation accordingly.  If the graph is disconnected, we compute the
connected components and then greedily connect them by adding additional clauses.
    Note we include the raw pre-encoded SAT instances as lists of 1-indexed integers, while the qubit
operators are 0-indexed.  We implement the following classes of instances for Max-k-SAT.

     Random          Clause ratios r∈{2, 3, 4, 5}
     instances
     SATLib          Limiting to 2- and 3-SAT. Random restriction (10 random instances per problem
                     size) to reduce problem size.
     (Auxiliary)     SAT instances

2.1.3    QMaxCut
Here  we  consider  a  “quantum  version”  of  MaxCut.   Though  this  problem  is  structurally  similar  to
its classical counterparts, its “quantumness” leads to rich and surprising differences in computational
complexity with respect to its classical counterpart [Par23].
    Quantum MaxCut (QMaxCut) is a quantum optimization problem (i.e., a local Hamiltonian prob-
lem) that can be understood as a generalization of the MaxCut problem.  Given a (possibly weighted)
graphG with vertices i∈V, edges (i,j)∈E, and non-negative weights wij∈W, the problem can be
defined as finding the maximum eigenvalue of the following Hamiltonian:

                                                  H = X         wijHij,                                                             (5)
                                                        (i,j)∈E

where Hij =  14 (I−XiXj−YiYj−ZiZj).  All instances in HamLib use wij∈{0, 1}.
    In general, QMaxCut is QMA-Hard [PM15], where QMA is the quantum analog of the NP complex-
ity class in classical computing [Pap03].  There are several approximation algorithms for this problem,
with the best approximation ratio for generic instances being 0.562 [Lee22].
    This problem is quantum in the sense that instead of finding the maximum eigenvalue of a real-
coefficient  degree-2  polynomial P  over  commutative  variables I,Z1,...,Zn,  the  problem  is  to  find
the maximum eigenvalue of a real-coefficient degree-2 polynomial Q over non-commutative variables
I,X1,Y1,Z1,...,Xn,Yn,Zn.  This polynomial can be expressed as a Hermitian matrix Q∈ C2n×2n
instead of a diagonal matrix P∈ C2n×2n.
    QMaxCut resembles MaxCut in that each termHij is a scaled version of the corresponding MaxCut
term of HC  with additional Pauli X  and Y  terms.  In particular, the diagonal of H  above is a scaled
version of the MaxCut Hamiltonian, HC.  These structural similarities have enabled generalizations
of approximation algorithms and hardness results for MaxCut to the QMaxCut setting [HNP+23].  In
this sense, QMaxCut has served as a testbed for developing algorithmic ideas to approximate quantum
local Hamiltonians, just as MaxCut serves as a canonical classical constraint satisfaction problem.
    Finding  a  maximum  energy  state  for  QMaxCut  is  an  equivalent  problem  to  finding  a  minimum
energy state of a quantum Heisenberg model, described below; although this leads to subtle differences
from  the  point  of  view  of  approximate  solving  [GP19].   This  is  one  instance  of  what  is  known  as
quantum 2-local Hamiltonians, for which finding their minimum or maximum eigenstates is relevant
for quantum many-body physics.
    While MaxCut has been a focal point for quantum algorithms such as QAOA, it is not clear whether
quantum algorithms can offer approximation advantages for classical problems.  For example, it is NP-
hard to approximate MaxCut better than the celebrated Goemans-Williamson algorithm [GW95] under
the  Unique  Games  Conjecture  [KKMO07],  and  NP-hardness  is  likely  a  barrier  for  polynomial-time
quantum algorithms as well.  Thus it may be fruitful to consider inherently  quantum  problems when
seeking quantum approximation advantages.  Yet the types of local Hamiltonian problems typically
studied in physics have not generally been amenable to approximation algorithms in the same way that
classical problems have been.  We include QMaxCut in HamLib because it may serve as a canonical
quantum  problem  in  the  study  of  quantum  approximation  advantages.   Approximation  algorithms
for QMaxCut employ techniques for approximating MaxCut as well as quantum approaches such as
variational algorithms [GP19, AGM20, PT21, PT22, Kin22, Lee22].  HamLib’s problem instances of
QMaxCut use the same graph instances as MaxCut.  The relevant table of instances is in Section 2.1.1.


                                                             9
2.2    Discrete-variable (d > 2) optimization problems
Here we consider classical cost functions that are defined over discrete variables taking more than 2
values.  As in the case of binary optimization problems, we create both random instances and instances
derived from widely-used libraries.
    Unlike MaxCut and Max-k-SAT, there is a rich set of choices for how these non-binary variables
are encoded into qubits [SSH22].  We implement the unary (i.e.  one-hot), Gray, and standard binary
encodings for the discrete combinatorial problems of this section.  A notable omission is the domain
wall encoding, which has been shown to improve computational efficiency in some cases [Cha19]; we did
not include it because this encoding is not yet included in mat2qubit [?].  Note that different encodings
require different numbers of qubits per variable, which in turn can lead to space-depth tradeoffs when
choosing encodings [SMK+20, SSH22].

2.2.1    Max-k-Cut
The Max-k-Cut problem is a generalization of MaxCut.  For a graph G = (V,E) with weight function
w  : E→ R for the edge set E,  the Max-k-Cut problem amounts to finding a partition of V  into k
disjoint  sets{C1,...,Ck}  that  maximizes  the  sum  of  the  edges  between  disjoint  sets,  i.e.,  the  cost
function is                 X                             X
                                                               w({u,v}).                                                           (6)
                                                  i,j∈[k]u∈Civ∈Cj
                                                    i>j
    In  this  work,  we  consider  only  unweighted  graphs  such  that  the  weight  function  becomes  the
indicator function 1E, i.e., 1 if{u,v}∈E and 0 otherwise.  This unweighted version of Max-k-Cut is
equivalent to finding the maximum k-colorable subgraph.  Max-k-Cut is APX-complete [FJ97] and is
equivalent to MaxCut for k = 2.
    We implement the same random graphs created for the MaxCut section, as well as a set of instances
derived  from  COLOR02  [col],  a  graph  library  used  for  benchmarking,  including  classical  studies  of
Max-k-Cut [GHHP13, LMM06].  In the latter case, we use a random depth-first search [DCD+06] to
achieve arbitrary-sized, connected subgraphs of the original problem.  For all problems in the Max-k-
Cut dataset, we use three encodings:  unary (i.e.  one-hot), Gray, and standard binary.  We summarize
the Max-k-Cut instances in the following table.  We use k∈{3, 4, 5}.

      Trivial         Complete k-partite with k∈{3, 4, 5}, circulant with offsets{3, 4, 5, 6}, windmill
      graphs          with k∈{3, 4, 5, 6} cliques.
      Random          Random X-Regular for X∈{3, 4, 5, 6}, GNP(n,d/n− 1) for d∈{2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
      COLOR02         Variable counts reduced via random depth-first search (10 random restrictions per
                      graph) up to 200 nodes.
      (Auxiliary)     Graph instances

2.2.2    Traveling Salesperson Problem
The traveling salesperson problem [BDVD+98, Lap92] (TSP) is a widely studied problem in combi-
natorics,  and  relates  to  routing  problems  encountered  in  industry.   Our  dataset  includes  both  cost
Hamiltonians and permutation penalties for the traveling salesperson problem, whose cost function is
defined as                    M−1X
                                                d (τ(a),τ(a + 1    mod M)).                                                  (7)
                                           a=0
    where τ  is  a  permutation  over  a  set  of M  cities.   We  encode  this  problem  as  a  permutation  of
integers  (as  opposed  to  a  binary  problem  with  constraints).   One  disjoint  set  of  qubits  is  used  per
city,  i.e.   if  there  are Nc  cities,  then Nc×D(Nc)  qubits  are  required,  whereD(K)  is  the  number
of  qubits  required  to  encode  a  discrete  variable  of  cardinality K.   This  way  of  representing  TSP  is
amenable to encoding-dependent penalties that have previously been called  pair  permutation  penal-
ties  [SSH22].When implementing this problem, one may alternatively use penalty-free methods that
constrain the state [HWO+19], including graph-derived partial mixers [SSH22].
    Notably, for the decision version of TSP, there is a phase transition [GW96] with respect to pa-
rameterα =l/√nA, wheren is the number of cities,A is the area, and the question is whether a path


                                                             10
length of≤l exists.  Whenα<α∗ there is unlikely to be any path shorter thanl.  This phase transition
has been observed to occur approximately atα∗ = 0.78.  We use this relation to guide our construction
of random instances.  For a given n, we select random positions in a square of area A = l2/(α∗)2n.
Roughly speaking, this implies that there is approximately a 50% chance that a path of lengthl exists;
we arbitrarily choose l = 100.
    For the 77 problem instances in TSPlib [Rei91] containing fewer than 1000 cities, we reduce the
number of cities one at a time,  by removing the city with the lowest weight,  i.e.  the city that has
the shortest distance to its two closest neighbors.  The justification is that the two shortest distances
are  likely  to  be  connected  in  the  optimal  route;  hence  the  rest  of  the  path  is  unlikely  to  radically
change.  This is just a heuristic and we acknowledge there may be topologies for which removing cities
in this way will qualitatively change the solution to the problem.  However, we note that this variable
reduction  procedure  is  conceptually  similar  to  what  is  done  in  previously  used  greedy  algorithms
[GCY+11, Lap92].
    We implement the following problem instances of TSP:
      Random                Random points chosen in a square of area A = 1002/0.782n.
      TSPLib                All  symmetric  instances  from  TSPLib  with Ncities <  1000.   Problem  size
                            reduction is implemented by iteratively removing the node with the smallest
                            weight.
      (Auxiliary)           Distance matrices for all problem instances.

2.3    Condensed matter physics models
Here we describe the condensed matter models included in the dataset.  We implement spin, fermion,
and boson models, covering 1D, 2D, and 3D lattices.  We expect the fermionic and bosonic models to
be the more useful contributions of this section as they involve more effort to prepare.
    We  use  both  periodic  boundary  conditions  (PBC)  and  non-PBC  for  all  lattices.   For  users  who
would like to add local disorder, we have included some qubit-encoded occupation number operators
for each individual site; these may be used to add local disorder.

Lattices
We include 1D grids, 2D grids, 2D ribbons, and 3D grids.  The 2D instances include square, triagonal,
and hexagonal (honeycomb) arrangements.  Qubit counts of 2 through 1000 are used, with spacing in-
creasingly sparse as qubit count increases.  Importantly, we implement a “snaking” pattern for all grids,
which leads to more efficient fermionic representations [VC05].  We include the mapping from node
ID to grid position as well, which may optionally be obtained using the read                    gridpositions        hdf5()
function found in the Appendix.

      1D                                 PBC and non-PBC.
      2D                                 Square, triangle, hexagonal.  PBC and non-PBC.
      2D ribbon                          Width 2 through 5 for square lattice.  PBC and non-PBC.
      3D                                 Cubic lattices.  PBC and non-PBC.
      (Auxiliary)                        Grid positions (mapping of node IDs to positions).

2.3.1    Transverse-field Ising model
The  transverse-field  Ising  model  (TFIM)  is  the  simplest  of  the  condensed  matter  models  that  we
include.  Notably, the one-dimensional version of TFIM is classically tractable even in the presence of
disorder.  The Hamiltonian is defined as

                                               H =X       hiXi +X       ZiZj,                                                       (8)
                                                       i           ⟨i,j⟩

where the sum is over each edge⟨i,j⟩ in the lattice.  Quantum critical points have been found to exist
at h≈ 3 in two-dimensional models [Kallin et al 2013], as well as at h≈ 5.16 in three-dimensional
TFIM  [Tepaske  and  Luitz  2021].   These  values  guide  our  choices  for  HamLib—in  order  to  include
Hamiltonians on both sides of these critical points we implement values h∈{0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
[BD02].


                                                             11
2.3.2    Heisenberg model
We implement the following Hamiltonian for the quantum Heisenberg model,

                                                        NX
                                             HHeis =        (⃗σi·⃗σi+1 +hiZ).                                                    (9)
                                                        i=1

where ⃗σi = (Xi,Yi,Zi).  The Hamiltonian is also known as the Heisenberg XXX model with external
magnetic  field  and  can  be  solved  by  the  Bethe  ansatz  in  the  one-dimensional  case  without  disor-
der [Fra17, GJS19].  Based on values used in previous work, HamLib includes h∈{0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5}
[CMN+18, Akı13].  While HamLib only includes the Heisenberg XXX model, anisotropic variants such
as the Heisenberg XXZ and XYZ models [WR10] can easily be generated from the lattice data.

2.3.3    Fermi-Hubbard model
The  Fermi-Hubbard  Hamiltonian  [Hub63]  captures  the  behavior  of  fermions  on  lattice  sites.   It  is
defined as                                           c†
                               HFH =−t X               i,σcj,σ +c†j,σci,σ +UX         ni↑ni↓,                                  (10)
                                             ⟨i,j⟩,σ                                i
where⟨i,j⟩ labels adjacent lattice sites i and j , σ labels the fermion spin, c and c† are the fermionic
annihilation and creation operators, respectively, and njσ =c†jσcjσ is the number operator associated
with  spin σ  and  site j.   The  first  term  contains  the  noninteracting  portion  of  the  Hamiltonian  and
describes  fermions  hopping  between  adjacent  sites  with  tunneling  amplitude t.   The  second  term
describes the on-site interaction between fermions with strength U.  The Fermi-Hubbard model can
be solved analytically for U  = 0 and t = 0.  However,  in the general case,  an analytical solution is
only known in 1D [LW03].  In 2D, the Fermi-Hubbard model has been investigated extensively through
simulations,  with  findings  suggesting  that  the  2D  Fermi-Hubbard  Hamiltonian  in  the  intermediate
coupling regime (U/t = 4, 6, 8) near half-filling is especially difficult to solve [LAB+15].
    HamLib includes numerous instances of the Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian for different lattice struc-
tures  and  dimensions.   We  implement  three  fermion-to-qubit  mappings  for  each  instance:   Jordan-
Wigner,  parity,  Bravyi-Kitaev  [CRO+19].    We  include  files  for  the  pre-encoded  fermionic  encod-
ings  as  well.   Based  on  previous  studies  on  1D,  2D,  and  3D  versions  of  the  Fermi-Hubbard  model
[LAB+15], the parameters we use are the same across all grid classes.  In particular, we take t = 1 and
U∈{0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12}.  We include pre-encoded fermionic Hamiltonians in OpenFermion format.

2.3.4    Bose-Hubbard model
The Bose-Hubbard (BH) model is defined as
                                                                             X
                                 HBH =−tX            b†i+1bi +h.c.     + U2      ni(ni− 1)                                   (11)
                                                i                              i

where b†i  (bi) are creation (annihilation) operators, the number operator ni≡b†ibi, t is the tunneling
strength (set tot = 1 in this work), andU is the site energy.  Equation (11) often includes an additional
term proportional to the chemical potential µ, which effectively sets the particle count.  We omit this
chemical potential term in our dataset, with the assumption that the user will set an arbitrary number
of particles at the beginning of the simulation.
    The standard version of this model exhibits two phases, a Mott insulator and a superfluid [FWGF89,
FM94].  More complex versions of the model lead to more exotic phases including density wave [PP05]
and supersolid phases [BSZK95].  There has been substantial previous work on qubit-based simulations
of  bosonic  degrees  of  freedom  [Som05,  MSAH18a,  MSAH18b,  KS19,  SMK+20,  SGH20,  TAM+21,
LSY21, BS24], though to our knowledge no qubit-based experimental demonstrations to date.
    For our dataset, we chose dimensional-dependent values forU, where parameters were based on the
phase diagrams reported in reference [FM94].  The transition between Mott insulator and superfluid
is dependent on the filling⟨n0⟩, the average number of particles per site.  The user may effectively set
⟨n0⟩ during simulation (e.g.  by choosing a particular product state at the beginning of the simulation).
For most values of⟨n0⟩ (which may be set for example by choosing a Fock state at the beginning of


                                                              12
the simulation), this range for U  will yield some Hamiltonians in the Mott insulator regime and some
in the superfluid regime.  For 1D, U/t∈ [2, 10, 20, 30, 40].  For 2D, U/t∈ [10, 30, 50, 70, 100].  For 3D,
U/t∈ [20, 40, 60, 90, 120].
    We implement 3 mappings for each instance: unary (one-hot), standard binary, and Gray, where we
implement bosonic mode truncations of both 4 and 8 (d = 4, 8).  We included files for the pre-encoded
bosonic encodings as well, in mat2qubit format.

2.4    Chemistry
2.4.1    Electronic structure
The molecular electronic structure Hamiltonian may be expressed as
                                                                 X
                                      H =Xhpqa†paq + 12               hpqrsa†pa†qaras                                           (12)
                                              pq                 pqrs

wherea† anda are the usual fermionic creation and annihilation operators. HamLib included molecules
from a range of chemical classes; further, we ensured that the molecules include a range of difficulty.
Unless otherwise specified, the nuclear coordinates used are those experimental geometries found in
the online database of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), https://cccbdb.
nist.gov/geometries.asp.  Important:  for most molecules provided, some low-energy orbitals were
frozen.  The number of frozen orbitals for each molecule is given in Appendix C. One must know the
number of frozen orbitals in order to properly choose the correct number of effective electrons to use
when implementing a quantum algorithm.
    An  important  consideration  was  the  choice  of  active  space,  as  one  goal  of  HamLib  is  to  have
problems with evenly-spaced qubit counts.  Hence for each molecule, we include Hamiltonians of several
qubit  counts, in order to allow the user to choose a level of complexity.  We chose the smallest qubit
count by calculating the CISD orbital occupation and keeping all orbitals for which the occupation is
greater than 0.1.  We use the def2SVP basis set for molecules containing transition metals, STO-6G
for elemental hydrogen, and ccPVDZ for all others.  We ensured that the coupled cluster CCSD(T)
energy converges with this occupation condition.  Then, to create several instances with more qubits,
we then added orbitals to this set either one orbital at a time or one set of degenerate orbitals at a
time, to create the 5 smallest qubit counts in addition to the large Hamiltonian that uses the full basis
set.
    Further, because the orbitals are ordered by energy, a user may straightforwardly create their own
electronic structure Hamiltonian of arbitrary qubit count by removing all qubits with index above some
number,  thereby  choosing  their  own  active  space.   This  may  be  done  with  the  remove                qindices()
function that we provide.  Our Hamiltonian sizes range up to 120 qubits, with the largest instances
being hydrogen chains.
    The  following  molecules  were  picked  based  on  different  benchmark  studies  that  have  been  per-
formed in the chemistry literature in recent years.  There are many high-accuracy classical methods
for simulating such systems, and a recent study on benzene [EAD+20] highlighted many of the most
modern methods that can be used for the same molecule.  Studies like these are seldom done for a
wide  range  of  molecules,  and  thus  we  rely  on  many  different  papers  that  span  a  range  of  different
molecules  to  look  at.   Our  dataset  includes  main  group  diatomics,  hydrogen  chains,  and  transition
metal containing diatomics.
    For the transition metal molecules, we selected 10 systems that range from “easy” to “hard.”  For
these molecules,  a recent work took a selected CI approach to use for a benchmark set of systems,
and then compared different coupled cluster techniques against these results [HTL+19].  We observed
that there is no obvious standard ordering of the hardness of these systems that is consistent with all
the different coupled cluster techniques.  For purposes of this work, we use CCSD(T) as the method
in which to assess the difficulty of the systems, as it is one of the most widely used rigorous methods
in quantum chemistry for treating correlated systems.  By this definition, these molecules in order of
difficulty are VH (1.0), ScO (1.4), ScC (3.9), TiH (4.9), CrO (8.1), MnN (9.6), FeC (10.7), CuC (12.3),
CoH , (22.7), NiO (38.2), where in parenthesis is the CCSD(T) error in units of kJ/mol.  We include
the famously difficult chromium dimer (Cr2) as well.
    We now discuss Hamiltonians composed only of hydrogen.  If quantum computers are going to be
used for computing properties of molecules and materials,  they must focus on the most challenging


                                                             13
Hamiltonians for which classical algorithms struggle.  In electronic structure, these are systems with a
large number of open-shell (singly occupied) orbitals, which leads to strong electron correlation among
the valence electrons.[LLZ+23, OCG+24, MDBT24]
    Examples of molecular systems with such features include stretched chemical bonds[Cha24, MDLBT24]
or transition metal clusters.[RWS+17, LLZ+23] However, in such systems, only a subset of electrons
are strongly correlated and many of the orbitals/electrons are weakly correlated and can be approx-
imated  at  the  mean-field  level.   Thus,  benchmarking  quantum  algorithms  on  a  system  with  many
strongly correlated electrons requires either using a large number of qubits or carefully selecting an
active space that contains only the strongly correlated electrons.  The selection of active spaces is a
non-trivial procedure that generally requires a significant amount of chemical understanding of each
system considered.[LLD+19]
    Instead, here we provide a set of hydrogen clusters at different geometries and in a minimal basis.
They are a good testbed for benchmarking quantum algorithms because, at stretched geometries, all
their electrons are strongly correlated.  By arranging the atoms in different geometries and dimensions,
these systems can be used for testing the ability of different wave function parameterizations to capture
different entanglement regimes.
    Hydrogen model systems have long served as a benchmark for electronic structure algorithms on
classical computers [JP80, MCC+17, SHE20], and are currently being used to test quantum or hybrid
quantum-classical algorithms [GEBM19, SHE20, KMZC+22, BMDTW23].
    For all four structural motifs (linear chains, rings, sheets and pyramids), we included Hn systems
with n  =  10, 12, 14, 16,  using  the  STO-6G  basis  set.   These  were  studied  in  Stair  et  al.   [SE20],
which benchmarked classical electronic structure methods including selected configuration interaction
(selected CI), singular value decomposition full CI, and density matrix renormalization group (DMRG).
This allows a direct comparison of any quantum algorithms with the classical benchmark data in said
paper.  Forn≤ 40 we include systems with bond lengths ranging from 0.5 ˚A to 2.0 ˚A in steps of 0.1 ˚A;
for n > 40 we include only the bond length 1 ˚A. For the linear Hn  structures, we include the atom
counts n = 2,4,6,8,10,12,14,16,18,20, 24,28,32,36,40, 50,60.
    For the systems with over 16 atoms, exact classical calculations are difficult or unfeasible and we
therefore only provide the restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) energy.  The larger Hamiltonians may be of
use for estimating the resources required for Hamiltonian simulation algorithms [LBG+21].
    We  used  3  mappings  for  each  problem  instance:   Jordan-Wigner,  parity  mapping,  and  Bravyi-
Kitaev.  We implement the following molecules for electronic structure.

      Hydrogen (Hn)                      1D chains, 1D rings, 2D sheets, 3D pyramidal clusters
      Main group diatomics               H2,  N2,  O2,  F2,  B2,  C2,  Be2;  LiH, BeH, BH, CH, NH, OH, HF,
                                         O3, Li2, NaLi, Na2
      Trans.  metals                     VH, ScO, ScC, TiH, CrO, MnN, FeC, CuC (low spin), CoH, NiO;
                                         Cr2
      Bond breaking                      F2 (single bond), O2 (double bond), N2 (triple bond)

2.4.2    Vibrational structure
Molecular  vibrational  structure  [WDC80]  is  a  problem  that  is  often  intractable  on  classical  com-
puters,  especially  when  strong  anharmonicity  and  resonanaces  (e.g.   Fermi  resonances)  are  present
[JMS12, MPR21].  Accurate calculations of the vibrational structure of molecules are crucial in identi-
fying unknown molecules in fundamental chemical physics experiments and in astrochemical settings.
Confirmed assignments in vibrational spectroscopy also provide direct probes of potential energy sur-
faces of molecules and fundamental probes of reactivity.  Further, the precise locations of vibrational
energy levels, which are difficult to compute classically, can directly impact the kinetics of chemical
reactions.
    In the harmonic basis, the vibrational structure Hamiltonian is

                               MX
                     H = 12        ωi(q2i  +p2i ) + X     hijkqiqjqk + X        hijklqiqjqkql +··· ,                     (13)
                                i                   {ijk}                 {ijkl}

whereqi are canonical position operators,pi are momentum operators,ωi are the harmonic frequencies,
and hij··· are higher-order coupling constants.


                                                             14
    In some respects, vibrational structure might often be easier to implement on a quantum computer
than electronic structure because the former does not require particle conservation and some properties
of vibrational Hamiltonians may be more favorable [SPT21].  Recent efforts in developing quantum
algorithms  for  calculating  vibrational  structure  have  demonstrated  how  some  vibrational  classical
algorithms (e.g., vibrational coupled cluster) can be adapted to quantum hardware [MMS+19, SH19,
OBRT20].
    For  this  benchmarking  set,  our  focus  is  on  diversifying  the  set  of  Hamiltonians  that  exist  for
benchmarking new methods in vibrational structure.  We include a limited set of diatomic molecules,
but our primary focus is on triatomic and larger systems.  Triatomic systems are the smallest systems
that can have resonances that complicate their vibrational structures.  Expanding to tetra-atomic and
larger systems allows one to study interesting and nontrivial differences in physical behavior between
related molecules.  For instance, BH3, BF3, and BHF2  each have a similar trigonal planar geometry,
but  their  vibrational  Hamiltonians  are  substantially  different  in  practice  due  to  the  different  mass
distributions across the geometry [SA70].
    We  include  a  mix  of  molecule  sizes  and  a  mix  of  vibrational  truncation  levels,  all  of  which  are
given in the key names of the HDF5 files.  We include up to fourth-order terms excluding those with
more than two unique indices (as such terms are often negligible), which is a common approximation
in  the  quantum  chemistry  literature.   This  truncated  expansion  is  common  in  vibrational  structure
calculations and with a good choice of the coordinate system is often well-converged.  The force fields
were generated with the CFOUR program package [MCH+20], at the highly accurate CCSD(T)/ANO1
(tetra-atomics and smaller without Cl or S), CCSD(T)/cc-PVTZ (tetratomics and smaller with S or
Cl), or Hartree-Fock/ANO0 (larger molecules) level of theory.
    These  Hamiltonians  are  stored  in  wavenumber  units  (cm−1)  commonly  used  by  spectroscopists.
We also include qubit encodings of dipole operatorsµ{x,y,z}, which are required for example in the cal-
culation of transition probabilities [RC19, JSP+21, INE+22, SH23] when determining infrared spectra.
Finally, in Appendix D we report statistics for how closely-space the energy levels are in these Hamil-
tonians, as resonances (i.e.  closely-space energy transitions) tend to be hard to simulate classically.
    We include 3 encodings for each instance:  unary (one-hot), standard binary, and Gray, as well as
the pre-encoded “bosonic” Hamiltonians in mat2qubit [?] string format.  The following molecules are
included.

      Diatomics                         BeH, BH, CH, CO, F2, HF
      Linear Triatomics                 HNC, HNO, C2O, C2H
      Bent Triatomics                   CH2, COH, H2O, H2S, H3+, HCO, NH2, NOH, O3, SF2, SO2
      Tetratomics                       BF3, BH3, BHF2, CH3, CH3+, ClCOH, FCCF, H2CC (vinylidene),
                                        H2CO, H2O2, HCCH
      Larger Molecules                  Allene  (C3H4),  Cyclopropene  (C3H4),  Ethylene  Oxide  (C2H4O),
                                        Propargyl cyanide (HC3H2CN)
      (Auxiliary)                       Qubit-encoded dipole operators ˆµx, ˆµy, ˆµz;
                                        Cartesian coordinates of molecule and harmonic normal modes;
                                        VPT2 Calculated transition energies

3    Benchmarking discussion

As noted previously,  HamLib is not itself a benchmarking suite.  Rather,  in conjunction with a set
of  computational  tasks,  it  may  be  used  to  define  proper  benchmarks.   Such  computational  tasks
may  include  “full”  algorithms  such  as  eigenvalue  finding  or  quantum  dynamics,  but  also  narrower
subroutines  such  as  estimation  of  expectation  values  or  compilation  routines  [PWS+16,  CFG+22,
LSKA, LJV+21, CBG21, TGO+22, YAGJ+21, MPJ+19, WRV+23].
    In this section, we discuss the various types of benchmarks that would benefit from a diverse li-
brary of Hamiltonians.  At its heart, the purpose of benchmarking is to make comparisons—answering
questions  such  as  “Which  of  these  computers  completes  the  task  more  quickly?”  or  “Will  this  new
algorithm yield more accurate results than previous state-of-the-art?” We distinguish between three
categories.  First, benchmarks that allow one to compare quantum algorithms (independent of hard-
ware choice); second, those that compare different quantum hardware platforms including error-prone
devices; and third, those that compare compilation and top-of-stack tasks.  Though these three can be


                                                             15
considered conceptually independent to some extent, many benchmarking tasks will fall under multiple
categories.
    Any  benchmark  involves  the  comparison  of  computational  resources,  accuracy,  or  both.   In  the
former case, one studies the computational time (related to quantum circuit depth and circuit repeti-
tions) and/or space requirements (number of qubits).  Often, there are time-space trade-offs, implying
that the best algorithmic choice is hardware-dependent.  In the case of studying accuracy, one instead
compares which computational approach leads to lower errors.  Below, we discuss several possible tasks
for which one might define benchmarks using HamLib.  Many related quantum benchmarks have been
previously proposed in the literature, as discussed in Section 1.2.
    Finally, we note that the above tasks may be used either for comparing quantum algorithms against
each other (“quantum-vs-quantum”), or for comparing quantum algorithms against classical algorithms
(“quantum-vs-classical”).  Both types of comparisons are valuable and our intention is for HamLib to
be used in both.

3.1    Benchmarking quantum algorithms
Here we discuss benchmarks designed to study quantum algorithms,  independently of the quantum
hardware  used.   The  primary  early  use  cases  we  envision  for  HamLib  are  eigenvalue  finding  and
quantum  dynamics.   As  mentioned  above,  these  may  be  analyzed  both  in  terms  of  solution  quality
(e.g.  accuracy) and in terms of computational resources.
    Eigenvalue finding is a common task, both in quantum problems (for which ground or excited states
are of interest) and classical optimization (where an extremal eigenvalue corresponds to the optimal
value).  For extremal eigenvalues (i.e.  ground states), several quantum algorithms have been developed.
Perhaps  most  well-studied  for  near-term  hardware  are  the  variational  quantum  eigensolver  (VQE)
[MRBAG16] and the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) [FGG14].  Both of these
involve a plethora of algorithmic choices.  Other quantum algorithms for this task include adiabatic
quantum optimization (or adiabatic state preparation) [FGGS00], quantum imaginary-time evolution
(QITE) [MST+20], feedback-based quantum algorithms [MRGS22], and quantum subspace methods
[PM19, KMZC+22].  Finding excited (non-extremal) eigenvalues requires either distinct quantum algo-
rithms or modifications of ground state algorithms.  Some notable approaches to excited state finding
include  the  folded  spectrum  method  [WZ94,  MRBAG16],  quantum  variational  deflation  [HWB19],
and quantum equations of motion [OKC+20]; the unmodified versions of QITE and quantum subspace
methods naturally provide estimates to excited states.
    Notably, each algorithmic component may be benchmarked separately.  For VQE and QAOA specif-
ically,  there  are  arguably  three  main  components  to  consider.   First,  one  may  implement  different
quantum circuit ansatzae, also known as parameterized quantum circuits [CRO+19, GEBM19, XK20,
ZKK+21, GZB+20, LOCC22].  Second,  one may compare different classical optimizers [MRBAG16,
GS17, SMM22].  Third, one may compare methods for calculating expectation values⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩, which is
often a very time-consuming subroutine [VYI20, GAD+20, CvSW+21, HKP20, KMZC+22, HMR+21].
    Simulating quantum dynamics—i.e.  implementing the exponential e−iH∆t of a Hamiltonian—is a
task distinct from eigenvalue finding and for which there are many algorithmic choices to be made.  The
most space-efficient approach is to use product formulas such as Suzuki-Trotter decompositions, for
which one may consider different orders as well as more complex approaches such as randomized prod-
uct formulas [Llo96, COS19, CST+21].  If one is primarily concerned with asymptotic scaling, as will
often be the case when considering long-term hardware, there are several more advanced Hamiltonian
simulation methods that require ancilla qubits [LC17, LSTT23, MOTT23].  Notably, exponentiation is
a key subroutine of other algorithms, including the above-mentioned quantum subspace methods and
some quantum machine learning protocols.
    For the algorithms discussed above, the choice of encoding  is very important and may be studied
as  a  standalone  consideration.   Fermionic  problems,  bosonic  and  vibrational  problems,  and  discrete
combinatorial problems all involve rich choices of encoding [CRO+19, SRL12, SMK+20, SGH20, SSH22,
MZK+23].   Indeed,  simply  changing  the  encoding  while  leaving  the  rest  of  the  quantum  algorithm
unchanged is a valuable study in itself.
    We briefly touch on quantum machine learning (QML), which is conceptually distinct from eigen-
value finding and quantum dynamics.  Some important machine learning tasks include classification,
regression, clustering, and dimensionality reduction.  Though such tasks were originally proposed in
the context of classical data such as images or user data, some recent work has gone into the “quantum


                                                            16
quantum” version of machine learning, whereby a quantum algorithm is used to analyze quantum data
[HBM+21].  In principle, some subsets of HamLib may be used in benchmarking for such tasks, as has
already been proposed in QML for chemistry [SLS+22].

3.2    Benchmarking quantum hardware
In this section, we discuss procedures designed to benchmark specific quantum devices, especially near-
term noisy devices [Pre18]. Our hope is that HamLib spawns a set of benchmarks meant to complement
the randomized benchmarking protocols that are often used in the industry [KLR+08].  Such hardware-
to-hardware comparisons are one major motivation behind benchmarking in classical computing, for
example,  when  evaluating  the  performance  of  a  new  generation  of  processor  or  supercomputer  (see
Section 1.3).
    The most obvious benchmarks in this category involve running eigenvalue finding and Hamiltonian
simulation  on  noisy  hardware,  to  determine  which  quantum  device  yields  the  most  accurate  result.
Though protocols such as quantum volume [CBS+19, MGE12, KLR+08, EWP+19] are valid, trans-
ferable,  and  objective  metrics,  it  is  unclear  how  such  metrics  relate  to  the  accuracy  of  a  practical
workload.  It could be that, when applied to scientifically relevant problems, some algorithms are less
(or more) sensitive to noise than expected.  For instance, it is not implausible that in some instances
doubling the decoherence rate will lead to a relatively small reduction in accuracy for some problems.
If there is such robustness to noise in a given device, then it is useful to understand its source and to
know for which applications it occurs.  It is worth mentioning that studying energy consumption of
the quantum device will be an important future direction as well [FC07, BDPF+21].
    Another class of benchmarks related to hardware involves the choice of encoding a logical qubit
into physical qubits.  This may involve a choice as simple as rotating each individual qubit basis, to
mitigate e.g.  amplitude damping noise.  Or the consideration may be more complex, such as choosing
between different decoherence-free subspaces [LBW03].  Again, it is plausible that the best choice of
qubit encoding is problem-dependent, which could be studied using the HamLib library.
    Finally, error mitigation protocols form an important area of study.  There have been several pro-
posed methods for mitigating errors on NISQ hardware [EBL18, CLK+21, HMO+21].  Benchmarking
such procedures for the different problem classes of HamLib may allow one to understand how and
whether to apply such techniques in real applications.

3.3    Benchmarking compilation and the full stack
Here  we  discuss  benchmarking  of  the  quantum  computing  “stack,”  especially  compilation  routines
[JPK+14, KWP+22, KIMK22].  We place such efforts in a qualitatively separate category because in
principle  they  do  not  require  real  simulations  nor  real  hardware.   In  other  words,  this  section  dis-
cusses benchmarks that do not involve interacting with the actual Hilbert space (whether via quantum
hardware or via classical simulators).
    Notably, though noisy hardware is likely to be the first testing environment for HamLib, we also
intend for HamLib to be used with fully error-corrected hardware in mind.  Among other differences,
the  gate  set  in  error-corrected  hardware  tends  to  be  different  than  that  used  in  NISQ  computers.
Especially important is resource estimation for error-corrected quantum computing.  Useful studies of
this type have been performed for chemistry, where estimates for required T gate counts have been
determined for classically intractable molecules [RWS+17, LLD+19, vBLH+21].  In such cases, because
one is not performing the actual quantum computation, one must use informed estimates for quantities
such as how many operations will be required to prepare a trial state for QPE and how much overlap
this  trial  state  will  have  with  the  ground  state.   Such  studies,  performed  using  HamLib,  may  help
researchers begin to understand how required resources scale with problem size, when solving various
problems on error-corrected quantum computers.
    Mapping  problems  to  qubit  representations  is  often  a  time-consuming  procedure.   For  instance,
fermionic  problems  must  implement  the  Jordan-Wigner  (or  related)  mapping  in  order  to  preserve
commutation properties, and the classical steps required may be substantial when one has (not un-
commonly) O(N4)  terms  to  consider.   As  mentioned  above,  analogous  mappings  are  required  for
vibrational and bosonic problems,  as well as classical problems.  There is likely much room for effi-
ciency improvement in generating qubit representations, for example via pre-processing, memoization,
and parallelization.


                                                             17
    Methods for quantum circuit construction and optimization may be benchmarked as well [KM13,
ASD14, NRS+18, WVMN19, SDC+20, PPJ+21, XLP+22, PSI+23, SIS+23, Dev22].  Both the speed of
the compilation and its quality must be considered, where circuit depth might be one quality criterion.
As an example, there are a plethora of choices for compiling circuits for Hamiltonian exponentiation,
each of which has different accuracy,  space,  and depth trade-offs [DKPVDW20, SSJM21, KIMK22,
PBW22, KLS23].  Further, there are multiple ways to decompose a given unitary [BBC+95], including
via randomized compilation [WE16], each of which might be considered by the compiler.  Gate fusions
and cancellations may be handled with different approaches that may need to be compared.  It will be
interesting to see the extent to which classical compilation, a mature field of many decades, will bring
techniques to bear on quantum circuit compilation.
    Finally,  we  note  that  there  are  many  aspects  of  running  the  quantum  stack  that  are  intimately
related to a particular hardware design.  When two-qubit gates are available only between physically
adjacent  qubits  (which  is  the  case  for  most  hardware  types),  gate  scheduling  protocols  [MTC+06,
GP18] must be benchmarked and the choice of qubit topology (i.e.  connectivity) intimately affects
performance [HJG+20].  As noted above,  multiple choices for decompositions into native gates may
be available as well, some of which may lead to more optimal circuits than others.  And further into
the future, certain aspects of the quantum-classical interface as it relates to quantum error correction
ought to be optimized, including the analysis of syndrome measurements [Rof19]. As hardware-software
codesign [LWS+21, WSM22] becomes more prevalent in quantum computer development, the HamLib
dataset may play a role in guiding many hardware design choices.

4    Concluding remarks

We have introduced a wide-ranging dataset of qubit Hamiltonians, for a variety of quantum problems
including condensed matter models, electronic structure, and vibrational structure, as well as classical
problems  including  Max-k-SAT,  Max-k-Cut,  and  the  traveling  salesperson  problem.   We  have  left
actual benchmarking studies to future work, using this first work to only introduce and characterize
the dataset.
    A primary purpose of this work was to provide the community with a set of problem instances that
can be used directly and immediately, without the need to learn and implement the tedious multi-step
processes required.  Preparing electronic and vibrational structure instances for real-world molecules,
for instance, involves significant domain knowledge and many software steps.  Further, our inclusion of
problems with real-world parameters and attributes (electronic structure, vibrational structure, TSP
for European cities) is meant to encourage the community to continue its focus on problems instances
that more closely relate to industrial impact.
    HamLib may be used for several distinct types of tests:  (a) simulating small problems on current
noisy quantum computers, (b) classically emulating quantum computers, or (c) studying processes for
which the quantum circuit itself does not need to be simulated,  e.g.  for compilation procedures up
to hundreds or thousands of qubits.  These Hamiltonians may be implemented in conjunction with a
range of algorithm classes for which new algorithmic approaches need to be tested or hyperparameters
tuned:  VQE,  QAOA,  adiabatic  quantum  state  preparation,  Krylov-subspace  methods,  and  various
long-term Hamiltonian simulation methods.
    Quality  classical  datasets  have  long  been  an  indispensable  component  of  benchmarking  for  the
design of supercomputers, processors, linear algebra methods, and AI algorithms.  We hope that this
dataset fills a similar role for the quantum computing community.

Acknowledgements

We thank RoaRQ consortium for useful discussions on dataset coverage, Shrihan Agarwal for useful
discussions on TSP, Timothy Proctor for manuscript feedback,  and Neil Mehta for testing portions
of  the  dataset.   We  acknowledge  support  from  Sandia  National  Laboratories’  Laboratory  Directed
Research and Development Program under the Truman Fellowship.  Sandia National Laboratories is
a  multimission  laboratory  managed  and  operated  by  National  Technology  &  Engineering  Solutions
of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. Department
of  Energy’s  National  Nuclear  Security  Administration  under  contract  DE-NA0003525.   This  paper


                                                            18
describes  objective  technical  results  and  analysis.   Any  subjective  views  or  opinions  that  might  be
expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the
United States Government.  This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE), Office of Science, National Quantum Information Science Research Centers, Quantum
Systems  Accelerator.   Additional  support  is  acknowledged  from  DOE,  Office  of  Science,  Office  of
Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Accelerated Research in Quantum Computing, Fundamental
Algorithmic Research in Quantum Computing.  This research used resources of the National Energy
Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User
Facility located at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, operated under Contract No.  DE-AC02-
05CH11231.  This included the use of NERSC award DDR-ERCAP0030342.  The authors would like
to acknowledge the use of the University of Oxford Advanced Research Computing (ARC) facility in
carrying out this work (http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558).  NMT is grateful for support
from NASA Ames Research Center. We acknowledge funding from the NASA ARMD Transformational
Tools and Technology (TTT) Project.  DMD acknowledges financial support by the EPSRC Hub in
Quantum Computing and Simulation (EP/T001062/1).  D.B.N. was supported by NASA Academic
Mission  Services,  Contract  No.   NNA16BD14C.  D.P.T.  acknowledges  support  from  the  Robert  A.
Welch Foundation, Grant no.  A-2049-20230405.  Portions of this research were conducted with high-
performance research computing resources provided by Texas A&M University HPRC.

References

[AB09]   Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak.             Computational complexity:  a modern approach. Cam-
                  bridge University Press, 2009.
[ACB+22]    Mercy G Amankwah, Daan Camps, E Wes Bethel, Roel Van Beeumen, and Talita Per-
                  ciano.  Quantum pixel representations and compression for n-dimensional images.  Sci-
                  entific reports, 12(1):7712, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-11701-y.
[AGM20]Anurag Anshu, David Gosset, and Karen Morenz.  Beyond Product State Approxima-
                  tions for a Quantum Analogue of Max Cut.  In Steven T. Flammia, editor, 15th Con-
                  ference  on  the  Theory  of  Quantum  Computation,  Communication  and  Cryptography
                  (TQC 2020), volume 158 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
                  pages 7:1–7:15, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum f”ur In-
                  formatik.  https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.TQC.2020.7.
[Akı13]  Umit  Akıncı.   Critical  behavior  of  the  3d  anisotropic  quantum  heisenberg  model  in
                  a trimodal random field distribution.  Journal  of  magnetism  and  magnetic  materials,
                  333:156–161, 2013.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2013.01.041.
[AKWL19]Juan Miguel Arrazola, Timjan Kalajdzievski, Christian Weedbrook, and Seth Lloyd.
                  Quantum algorithm for nonhomogeneous linear partial differential equations.  Physical
                  Review A, 100(3):032306, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.100.032306.
[ANP05]Dimitris Achlioptas,  Assaf Naor,  and Yuval Peres.  Rigorous location of phase tran-
                  sitions  in  hard  optimization  problems.    Nature,  435(7043):759–764,  2005.    https:
                  //doi.org/10.1038/nature03602.
[APMB20]Vishwanathan  Akshay,  Hariphan  Philathong,  Mauro  ES  Morales,  and  Jacob  D  Bia-
                  monte.  Reachability deficits in quantum approximate optimization.   Physical  review
                  letters, 124(9):090504, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.090504.
[ASD14]Nabila Abdessaied, Mathias Soeken, and Rolf Drechsler. Quantum circuit optimization
                  by hadamard gate reduction. In Reversible Computation:  6th International Conference,
                  RC  2014,  Kyoto,  Japan,  July  10-11,  2014.  Proceedings  6,  pages  149–162.  Springer,
                  2014.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08494-7_13.
[BBC+95]    Adriano  Barenco,  Charles  H  Bennett,  Richard  Cleve,  David  P  DiVincenzo,  Nor-
                  man  Margolus,  Peter  Shor,  Tycho  Sleator,  John  A  Smolin,  and  Harald  Weinfurter.
                  Elementary  gates  for  quantum  computation.    Physical  review  A,  52(5):3457,  1995.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.52.3457.


                                                           19
[BD02]   Henk WJ Blote and Youjin Deng. Cluster monte carlo simulation of the transverse ising
                  model. Physical Review E, 66(6):066110, 2002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.
                  66.066110.

[BDPF+21]  Casey  Berger,  Agustin  Di  Paolo,  Tracey  Forrest,  Stuart  Hadfield,  Nicolas  Sawaya,
                  Michal  Stechly,  and  Karl  Thibault.   Quantum  technologies  for  climate  change:  Pre-
                  liminary assessment.  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2107.05362, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.
                  48550/arXiv.2107.05362.

[BDVD+98] Rainer E Burkard, Vladimir G Deineko, Rene Van Dal, Jack AA van der Veen, and
                  Gerhard  J  Woeginger.   Well-solvable  special  cases  of  the  traveling  salesman  prob-
                  lem:   a  survey.    SIAM  review,  40(3):496–546,  1998.    https://doi.org/10.1137/
                  S0036144596305490.

[BIS+18]      Ville  Bergholm,  Josh  Izaac,  Maria  Schuld,  Christian  Gogolin,  Shahnawaz  Ahmed,
                  Vishnu  Ajith,  M  Sohaib  Alam,  Guillermo  Alonso-Linaje,  B  AkashNarayanan,  Ali
                  Asadi, et al. Pennylane:  Automatic differentiation of hybrid quantum-classical compu-
                  tations.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.04968, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
                  1811.04968.

[BM21]  Sami  Boulebnane  and  Ashley  Montanaro.   Predicting  parameters  for  the  quantum
                  approximate  optimization  algorithm  for  max-cut  from  the  infinite-size  limit.   arXiv
                  preprint arXiv:2110.10685, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.10685.

[BMDTW23]Hugh G.A. Burton, Daniel Marti-Dafcik, David P. Tew, and David J. Wales. Exact elec-
                  tronic states with shallow quantum circuits from global optimisation. npj Quantum In-
                  formation 2023 9:1, 9:1–8, 7 2023. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-023-00744-2.

[BPLC+23]  Carlos Bravo-Prieto,  Ryan LaRose,  Marco Cerezo,  Yigit Subasi,  Lukasz Cincio,  and
                  Patrick J Coles.  Variational quantum linear solver.  Quantum, 7:1188, 2023.  https:
                  //doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-01-20-1188.

[BS24]    Sina  Bahrami  and  Nicolas  Sawaya.     Particle-conserving  quantum  circuit  ansatz
                  with  applications  in  variational  simulation  of  bosonic  systems.      arXiv   preprint
                  arXiv:2402.18768, 2024.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.18768.

[BSZK95]G.  G.  Batrouni,  R.  T.  Scalettar,  G.  T.  Zimanyi,  and  A.  P.  Kampf.   Supersolids  in
                  the  Bose-Hubbard  hamiltonian.   Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  74:2527–2530,  Mar  1995.   https:
                  //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.2527.
[BWF+00]   Helen  M  Berman,  John  Westbrook,  Zukang  Feng,  Gary  Gilliland,  TN  Bhat,  Helge
                  Weissig,  Ilya  N  Shindyalov,  and  Philip  E  Bourne.   The  protein  data  bank.   Nucleic
                  acids research, 28(1):235–242, 2000.  https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.1.235.

[CBG21]Arjan Cornelissen,  Johannes Bausch,  and Andr’as Gily’en.  Scalable benchmarks for
                  gate-based  quantum  computers.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2104.10698,  2021.   https://
                  doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.10698.

[CBS+19]     Andrew W Cross, Lev S Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D Nation, and Jay M Gambetta.
                  Validating quantum computers using randomized model circuits.  Physical  Review  A,
                  100(3):032328, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.100.032328.

[CFG+22]    Kean  Chen,  Wang  Fang,  Ji  Guan,  Xin  Hong,  Mingyu  Huang,  Junyi  Liu,  Qisheng
                  Wang, and Mingsheng Ying. VeriQBench:  A benchmark for multiple types of quantum
                  circuits.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10880, 2022. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
                  2206.10880.

[Cha19]Nicholas Chancellor. Domain wall encoding of discrete variables for quantum annealing
                  and qaoa.  Quantum  Science  and  Technology, 4(4):045004, 2019.  https://doi.org/
                  10.1088/2058-9565/ab33c2.



                                                            20
[Cha24]Garnet Kin-Lic Chan.  Quantum chemistry, classical heuristics, and quantum advan-
                  tage.  Faraday Discussions, 2024.  https://doi.org/10.1039/D4FD00141A.

[CLK+21]    Ningping  Cao,  Junan  Lin,  David  Kribs,  Yiu-Tung  Poon,  Bei  Zeng,  and  Raymond
                  Laflamme.  NISQ: Error correction, mitigation, and noise simulation.   arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2111.02345, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.02345.

[CLO21]Andrew M Childs,  Jin-Peng Liu,  and Aaron Ostrander.  High-precision quantum al-
                  gorithms for partial differential equations.  Quantum, 5:574, 2021.  https://doi.org/
                  10.22331/q-2021-10-05-574.

[CMN+18]   Andrew  M  Childs,  Dmitri  Maslov,  Yunseong  Nam,  Neil  J  Ross,  and  Yuan  Su.   To-
                  ward  the  first  quantum  simulation  with  quantum  speedup.   Proceedings  of  the  Na-
                  tional  Academy  of  Sciences,  115(38):9456–9461,  2018.   https://doi.org/10.1073/
                  pnas.1801723115.
[col]            COLOR02:  Graph Coloring and its Generalizations.         https://mat.tepper.cmu.edu/
                  COLOR02/.  Accessed:  2023-04-14.

[COS19]Andrew M Childs, Aaron Ostrander, and Yuan Su. Faster quantum simulation by ran-
                  domization. Quantum, 3:182, 2019. https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2019-09-02-182.

[CRO+19]    Yudong Cao, Jonathan Romero, Jonathan P Olson, Matthias Degroote, Peter D John-
                  son,  M’aria  Kieferov’a,  Ian  D  Kivlichan,  Tim  Menke,  Borja  Peropadre,  Nicolas  PD
                  Sawaya, et al. Quantum chemistry in the age of quantum computing. Chemical reviews,
                  119(19):10856–10915, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803.

[CST+21]     Andrew M Childs, Yuan Su, Minh C Tran, Nathan Wiebe, and Shuchen Zhu.  Theory
                  of  Trotter  error  with  commutator  scaling.   Physical  Review  X,  11(1):011020,  2021.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.011020.

[CVH+22]    M Cerezo, Guillaume Verdon, Hsin-Yuan Huang, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J Coles.
                  Challenges  and  opportunities  in  quantum  machine  learning.   Nature  Computational
                  Science, 2(9):567–576, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00281-6.

[CvSW+21]  Ophelia Crawford, Barnaby van Straaten, Daochen Wang, Thomas Parks, Earl Camp-
                  bell,  and  Stephen  Brierley.    Efficient  quantum  measurement  of  Pauli  operators  in
                  the  presence  of  finite  sampling  error.     Quantum,  5:385,  January  2021.     https:
                  //doi.org/10.22331/q-2021-01-20-385.

[DCD+06]    Pierre Dupont, Jerome Callut, Gregoire Dooms, Jean-No”el Monette, Yves Deville, and
                  BP Sainte.  Relevant subgraph extraction from random walks in a graph.  Universite
                  Catholique de Louvain, UCL/INGI, Number RR, 7, 2006.

[DDS+09]    Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei.  ImageNet:  A
                  large-scale hierarchical image database.  In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
                  and pattern recognition, pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009.  https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
                  2009.5206848.

[DDSG+20]  Pierre-Luc  Dallaire-Demers,  Michal  Stechly,  Jerome  F  Gonthier,  Ntwali  Toussaint
                  Bashige, Jonathan Romero, and Yudong Cao. An application benchmark for fermionic
                  quantum simulations.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01862, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.
                  48550/arXiv.2003.01862.

[Dev22] Cirq  Developers.     Cirq,   December  2022.     See  full  list  of  authors  on  Github:
                  https://github .com/quantumlib/Cirq/graphs/contributors.

[DGS18]Iain Dunning, Swati Gupta, and John Silberholz. What works best when?  a systematic
                  evaluation of heuristics for Max-Cut and QUBO.  INFORMS  Journal  on  Computing,
                  30(3):608–624, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2017.0798.



                                                           21
[Dix91]  Kaivalya M Dixit.  The SPEC benchmarks.              Parallel  computing, 17(10-11):1195–1209,
                  1991.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-8191(05)80021-1.

[DKPVDW20]Ross  Duncan,  Aleks  Kissinger,  Simon  Perdrix,  and  John  Van  De  Wetering.   Graph-
                  theoretic  simplification  of  quantum  circuits  with  the  ZX-calculus.   Quantum,  4:279,
                  2020.  https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-06-04-279.

[DL21]   Yulong Dong and Lin Lin.  Random circuit block-encoded matrix and a proposal of
                  quantum linpack benchmark.  Physical Review A, 103(6):062412, 2021.  https://doi.
                  org/10.1103/PhysRevA.103.062412.

[DLH13]Jack Dongarra, Piotr Luszczek, and M Heroux.  HPCG technical specification.                Sandia
                  National Laboratories, Sandia Report SAND2013-8752, 2013.

[DLP03]Jack J Dongarra, Piotr Luszczek, and Antoine Petitet.  The linpack benchmark:  past,
                  present and future. Concurrency and Computation:  practice and experience, 15(9):803–
                  820, 2003.  https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.728.

[EAD+20]    Janus J Eriksen, Tyler A Anderson, J Emiliano Deustua, Khaldoon Ghanem, Diptarka
                  Hait, Mark R Hoffmann, Seunghoon Lee, Daniel S Levine, Ilias Magoulas, Jun Shen,
                  et al. The ground state electronic energy of benzene.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02678,
                  2020.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2008.02678.

[EBL18]Suguru Endo, Simon C Benjamin, and Ying Li. Practical quantum error mitigation for
                  near-future  applications.   Physical  Review  X,  8(3):031027,  2018.   https://doi.org/
                  10.1103/PhysRevX.8.031027.

[EHW+20]   Jens Eisert, Dominik Hangleiter, Nathan Walk, Ingo Roth, Damian Markham, Rhea
                  Parekh,  Ulysse  Chabaud,  and  Elham  Kashefi.    Quantum  certification  and  bench-
                  marking.   Nature  Reviews  Physics,  2(7):382–390,  2020.   https://doi.org/10.1038/
                  s42254-020-0186-4.

[ER+60]       Paul Erd˝os,  Alfr’ed R’enyi,  et al.  On the evolution of random graphs.        Publ.  Math.
                  Inst. Hung. Acad. Sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.

[EWP+19]   Alexander  Erhard,  Joel  J  Wallman,  Lukas  Postler,  Michael  Meth,  Roman  Stricker,
                  Esteban A Martinez, Philipp Schindler, Thomas Monz, Joseph Emerson, and Rainer
                  Blatt.  Characterizing large-scale quantum computers via cycle benchmarking.  Nature
                  communications, 10(1):1–7, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13068-7.

[FC07]       Wu-chun Feng and Kirk Cameron.  The green500 list:  Encouraging sustainable super-
                  computing. Computer, 40(12):50–55, 2007. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2007.445.

[FGG14] Edward  Farhi,  Jeffrey  Goldstone,  and  Sam  Gutmann.   A  quantum  approximate  op-
                  timization algorithm.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:1411.4028,  2014.   https://doi.org/10.
                  48550/arXiv.1411.4028.

[FGG20] Edward Farhi, David Gamarnik, and Sam Gutmann.  The quantum approximate op-
                  timization  algorithm  needs  to  see  the  whole  graph:  A  typical  case.   arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2004.09002, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.09002.

[FGGS00]Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, Sam Gutmann, and Michael Sipser.  Quantum com-
                  putation  by  adiabatic  evolution.    arXiv  preprint  quant-ph/0001106,  2000.    https:
                  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.quant-ph/0001106.

[FJ97]     A. Frieze and M. Jerrum.  Improved approximation algorithms for MAXk-CUT and
                  MAX  BISECTION.    Algorithmica,  18(1):67–81,  May  1997.    https://doi.org/10.
                  1007/bf02523688.

[FM94]  JK Freericks and H Monien.  Phase diagram of the Bose-Hubbard model.              EPL (Euro-
                  physics Letters), 26(7):545, 1994.  https://doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/26/7/012.



                                                           22
[Fra17]      Fabio Franchini.          An Introduction to Integrable Techniques for One-Dimensional Quan-
                  tum  Systems.  Springer International Publishing,  2017.   https://doi.org/10.1007/
                  978-3-319-48487-7.

[FRH+22]    Jernej Rudi Finˇzgar, Philipp Ross, Leonhard H”olscher, Johannes Klepsch, and Andre
                  Luckow.  Quark:  A framework for quantum computing application benchmarking.  In
                  2022 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE),
                  pages 226–237. IEEE, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1109/QCE55506.2022.00037.

[FWGF89]Matthew P. A. Fisher, Peter B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, and Daniel S. Fisher.  Boson
                  localization and the superfluid-insulator transition. Phys. Rev. B, 40:546–570, Jul 1989.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.40.546.

[GAD+20]    Pranav Gokhale, Olivia Angiuli, Yongshan Ding, Kaiwen Gui, Teague Tomesh, Martin
                  Suchara, Margaret Martonosi, and Frederic T. Chong. O(N3) measurement cost for
                  variational  quantum  eigensolver  on  molecular  hamiltonians.   IEEE  Transactions  on
                  Quantum Engineering, 1:1–24, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1109/TQE.2020.3035814.

[GCY+11]    Xiutang Geng, Zhihua Chen, Wei Yang, Deqian Shi, and Kai Zhao. Solving the travel-
                  ing salesman problem based on an adaptive simulated annealing algorithm with greedy
                  search.  Applied Soft Computing, 11(4):3680–3689, 2011.  https://doi.org/10.1016/
                  j.asoc.2011.02.002.

[GEBM19]Harper R. Grimsley, Sophia E. Economou, Edwin Barnes, and Nicholas J. Mayhall. An
                  adaptive variational algorithm for exact molecular simulations on a quantum computer.
                  Nature Communications, 10, 2019.

[GHHP13]Philippe Galinier, Jean-Philippe Hamiez, Jin-Kao Hao, and Daniel Porumbel.                    Recent
                  Advances in Graph Vertex Coloring, pages 505–528. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
                  Heidelberg, 2013.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-30504-7_20.

[GJS19]Etienne  Granet,  Jesper  Lykke  Jacobsen,  and  Hubert  Saleur.   Analytical  results  on
                  the  heisenberg  spin  chain  in  a  magnetic  field.   Journal  of  Physics  A:  Mathematical
                  and  Theoretical,  52(25):255302,  may  2019.   https://doi.org/10.1088/1751-8121/
                  ab1f97.

[GP18]   Gian Giacomo Guerreschi and Jongsoo Park.  Two-step approach to scheduling quan-
                  tum circuits. Quantum Science and Technology, 3(4):045003, 2018. https://doi.org/
                  10.1088/2058-9565/aacf0b.
[GP19]   Sevag  Gharibian  and  Ojas  Parekh.    Almost  Optimal  Classical  Approximation  Al-
                  gorithms  for  a  Quantum  Generalization  of  Max-Cut.    In  Dimitris  Achlioptas  and
                  L’aszl’o  A.  V’egh,  editors,  Approximation,  Randomization,  and  Combinatorial  Op-
                  timization.  Algorithms  and  Techniques  (APPROX/RANDOM  2019),  volume  145  of
                  Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 31:1–31:17, Dagstuhl,
                  Germany,  2019.  Schloss  Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum  fuer  Informatik.    https://doi.
                  org/10.4230/LIPIcs.APPROX-RANDOM.2019.31.

[GS17]    Gian Giacomo Guerreschi and Mikhail Smelyanskiy.  Practical optimization for hybrid
                  quantum-classical algorithms.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.01450, 2017.  https://doi.
                  org/10.48550/arXiv.1701.01450.

[GW95]Michel X Goemans and David P Williamson.  Improved approximation algorithms for
                  maximum  cut  and  satisfiability  problems  using  semidefinite  programming.   Journal
                  of  the  ACM  (JACM),  42(6):1115–1145,  1995.   https://doi.org/10.1145/227683.
                  227684.

[GW96]Ian P Gent and Toby Walsh.  The TSP phase transition.               Artificial Intelligence, 88(1-
                  2):349–358, 1996.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(96)00028-6.




                                                           23
[GZB+20]    Bryan  T  Gard,  Linghua  Zhu,  George  S  Barron,  Nicholas  J  Mayhall,  Sophia  E
                  Economou,  and  Edwin  Barnes.   Efficient  symmetry-preserving  state  preparation  cir-
                  cuits  for  the  variational  quantum  eigensolver  algorithm.   npj  Quantum  Information,
                  6(1):1–9, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-019-0240-1.

[HBM+21]   Hsin-Yuan  Huang,  Michael  Broughton,  Masoud  Mohseni,  Ryan  Babbush,  Sergio
                  Boixo,  Hartmut  Neven,  and  Jarrod  R  McClean.    Power  of  data  in  quantum  ma-
                  chine learning. Nature communications, 12(1):2631, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1038/
                  s41467-021-22539-9.

[HJG+20]     Adam Holmes, Sonika Johri, Gian Giacomo Guerreschi, James S Clarke, and Anne Y
                  Matsuura. Impact of qubit connectivity on quantum algorithm performance.  Quantum
                  Science  and  Technology, 5(2):025009, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/
                  ab73e2.

[HKP20]Hsin-Yuan Huang, Richard Kueng, and John Preskill.  Predicting many properties of
                  a  quantum  system  from  very  few  measurements.   Nature  Physics,  16(10):1050–1057,
                  June 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-020-0932-7.

[HMO+21]   William J Huggins,  Sam McArdle,  Thomas E O’Brien,  Joonho Lee,  Nicholas C Ru-
                  bin,  Sergio Boixo,  K Birgitta Whaley,  Ryan Babbush,  and Jarrod R McClean.  Vir-
                  tual distillation for quantum error mitigation.  Physical Review X, 11(4):041036, 2021.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.041036.

[HMR+21]   William  J.  Huggins,  Jarrod  R.  McClean,  Nicholas  C.  Rubin,  Zhang  Jiang,  Nathan
                  Wiebe,  K.  Birgitta  Whaley,  and  Ryan  Babbush.   Efficient  and  noise  resilient  mea-
                  surements  for  quantum  chemistry  on  near-term  quantum  computers.   npj  Quantum
                  Information, 7(1), February 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-020-00341-7.

[HNP+23]    Yeongwoo  Hwang,  Joe  Neeman,  Ojas  Parekh,  Kevin  Thompson,  and  John  Wright.
                  Unique games hardness of Quantum Max-Cut, and a conjectured vector-valued Borell’s
                  inequality.   In  Proceedings  of  the  2023  Annual  ACM-SIAM  Symposium  on  Discrete
                  Algorithms  (SODA),  pages  1319–1384.  SIAM,  2023.   https://doi.org/10.1137/1.
                  9781611977554.84.

[HS00]    Holger H Hoos and Thomas Stutzle.  SATLIB: An online resource for research on sat.
                  Sat, 2000:283–292, 2000.

[HSS08]Aric A. Hagberg, Daniel A. Schult, and Pieter J. Swart.  Exploring network structure,
                  dynamics,  and  function  using  networkx.   In  Ga”el  Varoquaux,  Travis  Vaught,  and
                  Jarrod Millman, editors,  Proceedings  of  the  7th  Python  in  Science  Conference, pages
                  11 – 15, Pasadena, CA USA, 2008.

[HTL+19]    Diptarka Hait, Norman M Tubman, Daniel S Levine, K Birgitta Whaley, and Martin
                  Head-Gordon.   What  levels  of  coupled  cluster  theory  are  appropriate  for  transition
                  metal systems?  a study using near-exact quantum chemical values for 3d transition
                  metal binary compounds.  Journal  of  chemical  theory  and  computation, 15(10):5370–
                  5385, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00674.
[Hub63]John Hubbard. Electron correlations in narrow energy bands.               Proceedings of the Royal
                  Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 276(1365):238–257,
                  1963.  https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1963.0204.

[HV02]  Johan  H˚astad  and  S.  Venkatesh.   On  the  advantage  over  a  random  assignment.   In
                  Proceedings  of  the  Thiry-Fourth  Annual  ACM  Symposium  on  Theory  of  Computing,
                  STOC ’02,  page 43–52,  New York,  NY, USA, 2002. Association for Computing Ma-
                  chinery.  https://doi.org/10.1145/509907.509916.

[HWB19]Oscar  Higgott,  Daochen  Wang,  and  Stephen  Brierley.    Variational  quantum  com-
                  putation  of  excited  states.    Quantum,  3:156,  2019.    https://doi.org/10.22331/
                  q-2019-07-01-156.


                                                            24
[HWO+19]   Stuart  Hadfield,  Zhihui  Wang,  Bryan  O’gorman,  Eleanor  G  Rieffel,  Davide  Ven-
                   turelli,  and  Rupak  Biswas.   From  the  quantum  approximate  optimization  algorithm
                   to  a  quantum  alternating  operator  ansatz.     Algorithms,  12(2):34,  2019.    https:
                   //doi.org/10.3390/a12020034.

[HWPC05]Klemens  Hammerer,  Michael  M  Wolf,  Eugene  Simon  Polzik,  and  J  Ignacio  Cirac.
                   Quantum benchmark for storage and transmission of coherent states.  Physical review
                   letters, 94(15):150503, 2005.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.150503.

[INE+22]     Yohei  Ibe,  Yuya  O  Nakagawa,  Nathan  Earnest,  Takahiro  Yamamoto,  Kosuke  Mi-
                   tarai,  Qi  Gao,  and  Takao  Kobayashi.    Calculating  transition  amplitudes  by  vari-
                   ational  quantum  deflation.    Physical  Review  Research,  4(1):013173,  2022.    https:
                   //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.013173.

[JMS12]Piotr Jankowski, ARW McKellar, and Krzysztof Szalewicz. Theory untangles the high-
                   resolution  infrared  spectrum  of  the  ortho-H2-CO  van  der  Waals  complex.   Science,
                   336(6085):1147–1150, 2012.  https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1220468.

[JN08]    Matti Jarvisalo and Ilkka Niemela. The effect of structural branching on the efficiency
                   of  clause  learning  sat  solving:  An  experimental  study.   Journal  of  Algorithms,  63(1-
                   3):90–113, 2008.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgor.2008.02.005.

[JOH+13]     Anubhav  Jain,  Shyue  Ping  Ong,  Geoffroy  Hautier,  Wei  Chen,  William  Davidson
                   Richards,  Stephen  Dacek,  Shreyas  Cholia,  Dan  Gunter,  David  Skinner,  Gerbrand
                   Ceder,  et  al.   Commentary:   The  Materials  Project:   A  materials  genome  approach
                   to  accelerating  materials  innovation.    APL  materials,  1(1):011002,  2013.    https:
                   //doi.org/10.1063/1.4812323.

[JP80]     K. Jankowski and J. Paldus.  Applicability of coupled-pair theories to quasidegener-
                   ate electronic states:  A model study.   International  Journal  of  Quantum  Chemistry,
                   18:1243–1269, 11 1980.  https://doi.org/10.1002/QUA.560180511.

[JPK+14]     Ali JavadiAbhari, Shruti Patil, Daniel Kudrow, Jeff Heckey, Alexey Lvov, Frederic T
                   Chong, and Margaret Martonosi.  ScaffCC: A framework for compilation and analysis
                   of quantum computing programs. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Com-
                   puting Frontiers, pages 1–10, 2014.  https://doi.org/10.1145/2597917.2597939.

[JS23]      Raghav Jumade and Nicolas PD Sawaya. Data is often loadable in short depth:  Quan-
                   tum  circuits  from  tensor  networks  for  finance,  images,  fluids,  and  proteins.    arXiv
                   preprint arXiv:2309.13108, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.13108.
[JSP+21]      Hamza Jnane, Nicolas PD Sawaya, Borja Peropadre, Alan Aspuru-Guzik, Raul Garcia-
                   Patron, and Joonsuk Huh. Analog quantum simulation of non-condon effects in molec-
                   ular spectroscopy. ACS Photonics, 8(7):2007–2016, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1021/
                   acsphotonics.1c00430.

[JWM15]Nan  Jiang,  Jian  Wang,  and  Yue  Mu.   Quantum  image  scaling  up  based  on  nearest-
                   neighbor  interpolation  with  integer  scaling  ratio.   Quantum  information  processing,
                   14(11):4001–4026, 2015.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11128-015-1123-9.

[Kar96] Howard  Karloff.   How  good  is  the  Goemans-Williamson  MAX  CUT  algorithm?    In
                   Proceedings  of  the  twenty-eighth  annual  ACM  symposium  on  Theory  of  Computing,
                   pages 427–434, 1996.  https://doi.org/10.1145/237814.237977.

[KIMK22]Y   Kharkov,   A   Ivanova,   E   Mikhantiev,   and   A   Kotelnikov.       Arline   bench-
                   marks:   Automated  benchmarking  platform  for  quantum  compilers.   arXiv  preprint
                   arXiv:2202.14025, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.14025.

[Kin22]  Robbie  King.   An  improved  approximation  algorithm  for  quantum  max-cut.                arXiv
                   preprint arXiv:2209.02589, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2209.02589.



                                                            25
[KKMO07]Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Elchanan Mossel, and Ryan O’Donnell.  Optimal inap-
                  proximability  results  for  MAX-CUT  and  other  2-variable  CSPs?    SIAM  Journal  on
                  Computing, 37(1):319–357, 2007.  https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539705447372.

[KLMT00]Emanuel Knill, R Laflamme, R Martinez, and C-H Tseng.  An algorithmic benchmark
                  for quantum information processing.  Nature, 404(6776):368–370, 2000.  https://doi.
                  org/10.1038/404368A0.

[KLR+08]    Emanuel Knill, Dietrich Leibfried, Rolf Reichle, Joe Britton, R Brad Blakestad, John D
                  Jost, Chris Langer, Roee Ozeri, Signe Seidelin, and David J Wineland.  Randomized
                  benchmarking  of  quantum  gates.    Physical  Review  A,  77(1):012307,  2008.    https:
                  //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.77.012307.

[KLS23]Andrey Boris Khesin, Jonathan Z Lu, and Peter W Shor. Graphical quantum clifford-
                  encoder  compilers  from  the  ZX  calculus.    arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2301.02356,  2023.
                  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.02356.
[KM13] Vadym  Kliuchnikov  and  Dmitri  Maslov.   Optimization  of  Clifford  circuits.                Physical
                  Review A, 88(5):052307, 2013.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.88.052307.

[KMZC+22] Katherine Klymko, Carlos Mejuto-Zaera, Stephen J. Cotton, Filip Wudarski, Miroslav
                  Urbanek, Diptarka Hait, Martin Head-Gordon, K. Birgitta Whaley, Jonathan Moussa,
                  Nathan  Wiebe,  Wibe  A.  de  Jong,  and  Norm  M.  Tubman.   Real-time  evolution  for
                  ultracompact hamiltonian eigenstates on quantum hardware. PRX Quantum, 3:020323,
                  5 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020323.

[KS19]    Natalie Klco and Martin J Savage. Digitization of scalar fields for quantum computing.
                  Physical  Review  A,  99(5):052335,  2019.    https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.
                  052335.

[KWP+22]   Pradnya  Khalate,  Xin-Chuan  Wu,  Shavindra  Premaratne,  Justin  Hogaboam,  Adam
                  Holmes,  Albert  Schmitz,  Gian  Giacomo  Guerreschi,  Xiang  Zou,  and  AY  Matsuura.
                  An LLVM-based C++ compiler toolchain for variational hybrid quantum-classical al-
                  gorithms and quantum accelerators.  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2202.11142, 2022.  https:
                  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2202.11142.

[LAB+15]    James  PF  LeBlanc,  Andrey  E  Antipov,  Federico  Becca,  Ireneusz  W  Bulik,  Garnet
                  Kin-Lic Chan, Chia-Min Chung, Youjin Deng, Michel Ferrero, Thomas M Henderson,
                  Carlos  A  Jim’enez-Hoyos,  et  al.   Solutions  of  the  two-dimensional  Hubbard  model:
                  Benchmarks and results from a wide range of numerical algorithms.  Physical  Review
                  X, 5(4):041041, 2015.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.5.041041.

[Lap92] Gilbert Laporte.  The traveling salesman problem:  An overview of exact and approx-
                  imate  algorithms.   European  Journal  of  Operational  Research,  59(2):231–247,  1992.
                  https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(92)90138-Y.

[LBG+21]    Joonho Lee, Dominic W. Berry, Craig Gidney, William J. Huggins, Jarrod R. McClean,
                  Nathan  Wiebe,  and  Ryan  Babbush.   Even  more  efficient  quantum  computations  of
                  chemistry through tensor hypercontraction. PRX Quantum, 2:030305, Jul 2021. https:
                  //doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.030305.

[LBW03]Daniel A Lidar and K Birgitta Whaley.  Decoherence-free subspaces and subsystems.
                  In  Irreversible  quantum  dynamics, pages 83–120. Springer, 2003.  https://doi.org/
                  10.1007/3-540-44874-8_5.

[LC17]    Guang Hao Low and Isaac L Chuang.  Optimal hamiltonian simulation by quantum
                  signal processing.  Physical review letters, 118(1):010501, 2017.  https://doi.org/10.
                  1103/PhysRevLett.118.010501.

[LC20]    Ryan LaRose and Brian Coyle. Robust data encodings for quantum classifiers.             Physical
                  Review A, 102(3):032420, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.102.032420.


                                                           26
[LCM+23]    Thomas  Lubinski,   Carleton  Coffrin,   Catherine  McGeoch,   Pratik  Sathe,   Joshua
                  Apanavicius, and David E Bernal Neira.  Optimization applications as quantum per-
                  formance benchmarks.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02278, 2023. https://doi.org/10.
                  48550/arXiv.2302.02278.
[Lee22]  Eunou  Lee.     Optimizing  quantum  circuit  parameters  via  SDP.                 arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2209.00789, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2209.00789.
[LJM+20]    Michael Lubasch, Jaewoo Joo, Pierre Moinier, Martin Kiffner, and Dieter Jaksch. Vari-
                  ational quantum algorithms for nonlinear problems. Physical Review A, 101(1):010301,
                  2020.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.010301.
[LJV+21]     Thomas Lubinski, Sonika Johri, Paul Varosy, Jeremiah Coleman, Luning Zhao, Jason
                  Necaise, Charles H. Baldwin, Karl Mayer, and Timothy Proctor. Application-oriented
                  performance benchmarks for quantum computing, 2021. https://doi.org/10.48550/
                  arXiv.2110.03137.
[LLD+19]     Zhendong Li, Junhao Li, Nikesh S Dattani, CJ Umrigar, and Garnet Kin Chan.  The
                  electronic complexity of the ground-state of the FeMo cofactor of nitrogenase as relevant
                  to quantum simulations. The Journal of chemical physics, 150(2), 2019. https://doi.
                  org/10.1063/1.5128103.
[Llo96]   Seth  Lloyd.    Universal  quantum  simulators.                Science,  273(5278):1073–1078,  1996.
                  https://doi.org/10.1126/science.273.5278.1073.
[LLZ+23]     Seunghoon Lee, Joonho Lee, Huanchen Zhai, Yu Tong, Alexander M Dalzell, Ashutosh
                  Kumar, Phillip Helms, Johnnie Gray, Zhi-Hao Cui, Wenyuan Liu, Michael Kastoryano,
                  Ryan Babbush, John Preskill, David R Reichman, Earl T Campbell, Edward F Valeev,
                  Lin Lin, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan.  Evaluating the evidence for exponential quantum
                  advantage  in  ground-state  quantum  chemistry.   Nature  Communications  2023  14:1,
                  14:1–7, 4 2023.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37587-6.
[LMM06]C. Lucet, F. Mendes, and A. Moukrim. An exact method for graph coloring.                 Computers
                  and Operations Research, 33(8):2189–2207, 2006.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.
                  2005.01.008.
[LMS12]Daniel Lokshtanov, Neeldhara Misra, and Saket Saurabh.  Kernelization-preprocessing
                  with a guarantee. The Multivariate Algorithmic Revolution and Beyond, 7370:129–161,
                  2012.
[LOCC22]Lorenzo Leone, Salvatore FE Oliviero, Lukasz Cincio, and M Cerezo. On the practical
                  usefulness  of  the  hardware  efficient  ansatz.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2211.01477,  2022.
                  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.01477.
[LSKA] Ang Li, Samuel Stein, Sriram Krishnamoorthy, and James Ang.  QASMBench:  A low-
                  level quantum benchmark suite for NISQ evaluation and simulation. ACM Transactions
                  on Quantum Computing.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3573047.
[LSTT23]Guang  Hao  Low,  Yuan  Su,  Yu  Tong,  and  Minh  C  Tran.                   PRX  Quantum,  4:020323,
                  2023.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.020323.
[LSY21]Junyu Liu,  Jinzhao Sun,  and Xiao Yuan.  Towards a variational Jordan-Lee-Preskill
                  quantum algorithm.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2109.05547,  2021.   https://doi.org/10.
                  48550/arXiv.2109.05547.
[LW03]     Elliott  H  Lieb  and  FY  Wu.   The  one-dimensional  Hubbard  model:  a  reminiscence.
                  Physica  A:  statistical  mechanics  and  its  applications,  321(1-2):1–27,  2003.    https:
                  //doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4371(02)01785-5.
[LWS+21]    Gushu Li, Anbang Wu, Yunong Shi, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Yufei Ding, and Yuan Xie. On
                  the co-design of quantum software and hardware.  In Proceedings of the Eight Annual
                  ACM  International  Conference  on  Nanoscale  Computing  and  Communication,  pages
                  1–7, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3477206.3477464.


                                                           27
[MAAM21]Koen  Mesman,  Zaid  Al-Ars,  and  Matthias  M¨oller.   QPack:   Quantum  approximate
                  optimization algorithms as universal benchmark for quantum computers, 2021. https:
                  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.17193.
[MB18]  Mohammad Mohammadi and Timur Bazhirov.  Comparative benchmarking of cloud
                  computing vendors with high performance linpack.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  Inter-
                  national Conference on High Performance Compilation, Computing and Communica-
                  tions, pages 1–5, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.1145/3195612.3195917.
[MCC+17]   Mario Motta, David M. Ceperley, Garnet Kin Lic Chan, John A. Gomez, Emanuel Gull,
                  S. Guo, Carlos A. Jim´enez-Hoyos, Tran Nguyen Lan, Jia Li, Fengjie Ma, Andrew J. Mil-
                  lis, Nikolay V. Prokof’ev, Ushnish Ray, Gustavo E. Scuseria, Sandro Sorella, Edwin M.
                  Stoudenmire, Qiming Sun, Igor S. Tupitsyn, Steven R. White, Dominika Zgid, and Shi-
                  wei Zhang. Towards the solution of the many-electron problem in real materials: Equa-
                  tion of state of the hydrogen chain with state-of-the-art many-body methods.  Physical
                  Review X, 7:031059, 9 2017.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PHYSREVX.7.031059.
[MCH+20]   Devin A Matthews, Lan Cheng, Michael E Harding, Filippo Lipparini, Stella Stopkow-
                  icz, Thomas-C Jagau, P’eter G Szalay, J”urgen Gauss, and John F Stanton.  Coupled-
                  cluster techniques for computational chemistry:  The CFOUR program package.  The
                  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics,  152(21):214108,  2020.   https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
                  0004837.
[MDBT24]Daniel Marti-Dafcik, Hugh G. A. Burton, and David P. Tew.  Spin coupling is all you
                  need:  Encoding strong electron correlation on quantum computers.  arXiv:2404.18878,
                  4 2024.
[MDLBT24]Daniel   Marti-Dafcik,   Nicholas   Lee,   Hugh   G.   A.   Burton,   and   David   P.   Tew.
                  Spin-coupled   molecular   orbitals:     chemical   intuition   meets   quantum   chemistry.
                  arXiv:2402.08858, 2 2024.
[MGE12]Easwar  Magesan,  Jay  M  Gambetta,  and  Joseph  Emerson.   Characterizing  quantum
                  gates via randomized benchmarking.  Physical  Review  A, 85(4):042311, 2012.  https:
                  //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.85.042311.
[MMB+10]   Richard  C  Murphy,  Kamesh  Madduri,  David  A  Bader,  Aydın  Bulu¸c,  Jack  J  Don-
                  garra, Simon D Hammond, Hartmut Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, David A Padua, and
                  Samuel  W  Williams.   Introducing  the  graph  500  benchmark.   In  Proceedings  of  the
                  Conference on High Performance Computing Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages
                  1–11. ACM, 2010.  https://doi.org/10.1109/SC.2010.49.
[MMS+19]   Sam McArdle, Alexander Mayorov, Xiao Shan, Simon Benjamin, and Xiao Yuan. Dig-
                  ital quantum simulation of molecular vibrations.  Chemical science, 10(22):5725–5735,
                  2019.  https://doi.org/10.1039/C8SC05592K.
[MOTT23]Alexander  Miessen,  Pauline  J  Ollitrault,  Francesco  Tacchino,  and  Ivano  Tavernelli.
                  Quantum algorithms for quantum dynamics.  Nature Computational Science, 3(1):25–
                  37, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00387-x.
[MPJ+19]    Alexander J McCaskey, Zachary P Parks, Jacek Jakowski, Shirley V Moore, Titus D
                  Morris, Travis S Humble, and Raphael C Pooser. Quantum chemistry as a benchmark
                  for near-term quantum computers.  npj Quantum Information, 5(1):1–8, 2019.  https:
                  //doi.org/10.1038/s41534-019-0209-0.
[MPR21]Tina Mathea, Taras Petrenko, and Guntram Rauhut. VCI calculations based on canon-
                  ical and localized normal coordinates for non-abelian molecules: accurate assignment of
                  the vibrational overtones of allene.  The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 125(4):990–
                  998, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c01174.
[MRBAG16]Jarrod R McClean, Jonathan Romero, Ryan Babbush, and Al’an Aspuru-Guzik.  The
                  theory  of  variational  hybrid  quantum-classical  algorithms.   New  Journal  of  Physics,
                  18(2):023023, 2016.  https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023.


                                                           28
[MRC+20]   Peter Mattson, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Christine Cheng, Cody Coleman, Greg Diamos,
                  David Kanter, Paulius Micikevicius, David Patterson, Guenther Schmuelling, Hanlin
                  Tang,  et  al.   MLPerf:  An  industry  standard  benchmark  suite  for  machine  learning
                  performance.   IEEE  Micro,  40(2):8–16,  2020.   https://doi.org/10.1109/MM.2020.
                  2974843.
[MRGS22]Alicia  B.  Magann,  Kenneth  M.  Rudinger,  Matthew  D.  Grace,  and  Mohan  Sarovar.
                  Feedback-based quantum optimization. Phys. Rev. Lett., 129:250502, Dec 2022. https:
                  //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.250502.

[MRS+20]    Jarrod  R  McClean,  Nicholas  C  Rubin,  Kevin  J  Sung,  Ian  D  Kivlichan,  Xavier
                  Bonet-Monroig,  Yudong  Cao,  Chengyu  Dai,  E  Schuyler  Fried,  Craig  Gidney,  Bren-
                  dan  Gimby,  Pranav  Gokhale,  Thomas  H¨aner,  Tarini  Hardikar,  Vojtˇech  Havl´ıˇcek,
                  Oscar  Higgott,  Cupjin  Huang,  Josh  Izaac,  Zhang  Jiang,  Xinle  Liu,  Sam  McAr-
                  dle,  Matthew  Neeley,  Thomas  O’Brien,  Bryan  O’Gorman,  Isil  Ozfidan,  Maxwell  D
                  Radin, Jhonathan Romero, Nicolas P D Sawaya, Bruno Senjean, Kanav Setia, Sukin
                  Sim,  Damian  S  Steiger,  Mark  Steudtner,  Qiming  Sun,  Wei  Sun,  Daochen  Wang,
                  Fang  Zhang,  and  Ryan  Babbush.   OpenFermion:   the  electronic  structure  package
                  for  quantum  computers.   Quantum  Science  and  Technology,  5(3):034014,  jun  2020.
                  https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ab8ebc.

[MSAH18a]Alexandru Macridin, Panagiotis Spentzouris, James Amundson, and Roni Harnik. Dig-
                  ital quantum computation of fermion-boson interacting systems.   Physical  Review  A,
                  98(4):042312, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.98.042312.
[MSAH18b]Alexandru  Macridin,  Panagiotis  Spentzouris,  James  Amundson,  and  Roni  Harnik.
                  Electron-phonon systems on a universal quantum computer.   Physical  review  letters,
                  121(11):110504, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.110504.

[MST+20]    Mario   Motta,   Chong   Sun,   Adrian   TK   Tan,   Matthew   J   O’Rourke,   Erika   Ye,
                  Austin  J  Minnich,  Fernando  GSL  Brand  ao,  and  Garnet  Kin-Lic  Chan.   Determin-
                  ing eigenstates and thermal states on a quantum computer using quantum imaginary
                  time  evolution.   Nature  Physics,  16(2):205–210,  2020.   https://doi.org/10.1038/
                  s41567-019-0704-4.
[MTC+06]   Tzvetan  S  Metodi,  Darshan  D  Thaker,  Andrew  W  Cross,  Frederic  T  Chong,  and
                  Isaac L Chuang.  Scheduling physical operations in a quantum information processor.
                  In  Quantum  Information  and  Computation  IV,  volume  6244,  pages  210–221.  SPIE,
                  2006.  https://doi.org/10.1117/12.659432.
[MZK+23]    Aaron  Miller,  Zolt´an  Zimbor´as,  Stefan  Knecht,  Sabrina  Maniscalco,  and  Guillermo
                  Garc´ıa-P´erez.   Bonsai  algorithm:  Grow  your  own  fermion-to-qubit  mappings.   PRX
                  Quantum, 4:030314, 7 2023.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQUANTUM.4.030314.

[NMP+23]   Akimoto  Nakayama,  Kosuke  Mitarai,  Leonardo  Placidi,  Takanori  Sugimoto,  and
                  Keisuke  Fujii.   Vqe-generated  quantum  circuit  dataset  for  machine  learning.   arXiv
                  preprint arXiv:2302.09751, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.09751.
[NRS+18]     Yunseong Nam, Neil J Ross, Yuan Su, Andrew M Childs, and Dmitri Maslov.  Auto-
                  mated optimization of large quantum circuits with continuous parameters.  npj Quan-
                  tum Information, 4(1):23, 2018.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-018-0072-4.

[OBRT20] Pauline J Ollitrault, Alberto Baiardi, Markus Reiher, and Ivano Tavernelli.  Hardware
                  efficient quantum algorithms for vibrational structure calculations.  Chemical science,
                  11(26):6842–6855, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1039/D0SC01908A.
[OCG+24]    Pauline J. Ollitrault, Cristian L. Cortes, Jerome F. Gonthier, Robert M. Parrish, Dario
                  Rocca,  Gian-Luca  Anselmetti,  Matthias  Degroote,  Nikolaj  Moll,  Raffaele  Santagati,
                  and  Michael  Streif.   Enhancing  initial  state  overlap  through  orbital  optimization  for
                  faster molecular electronic ground-state energy estimation.  arXiv:2404.08565, 4 2024.
                  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.08565.


                                                            29
[OKC+20]    Pauline J Ollitrault, Abhinav Kandala, Chun-Fu Chen, Panagiotis Kl Barkoutsos, An-
                  tonio Mezzacapo,  Marco Pistoia,  Sarah Sheldon,  Stefan Woerner,  Jay M Gambetta,
                  and Ivano Tavernelli. Quantum equation of motion for computing molecular excitation
                  energies on a noisy quantum processor.  Physical Review Research, 2(4):043140, 2020.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043140.
[Pap03]    Christos H Papadimitriou.  Computational complexity.  In           Encyclopedia  of  computer
                  science, pages 260–265. 2003.
[Par23]      Ojas Parekh. Synergies between operations research and quantum information science.
                  INFORMS J. on Computing, 35(2):266–273, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.
                  2023.1268.

[PBW22]Tom Peham, Lukas Burgholzer, and Robert Wille.  Equivalence checking of quantum
                  circuits  with  the  ZX-calculus.    IEEE  Journal  on  Emerging  and  Selected  Topics  in
                  Circuits and Systems, 12(3):662–675, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1109/JETCAS.2022.
                  3193278.

[PM15]  Stephen Piddock and Ashley Montanaro.  The complexity of antiferromagnetic inter-
                  actions and 2D lattices.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:1506.04014, 2015.  https://doi.org/
                  10.48550/arXiv.1506.04014.
[PM19]  Robert  M  Parrish  and  Peter  L  McMahon.   Quantum  filter  diagonalization:   Quan-
                  tum  eigendecomposition  without  full  quantum  phase  estimation.     arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:1909.08925, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.08925.
[PP05]   Ramesh V Pai and Rahul Pandit.  Superfluid, mott-insulator, and mass-density-wave
                  phases  in  the  one-dimensional  extended  Bose-Hubbard  model.    Physical  Review  B,
                  71(10):104508, 2005.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.71.104508.
[PPJ+21]     Jessica Pointing, Oded Padon, Zhihao Jia, Henry Ma, Auguste Hirth, Jens Palsberg,
                  and  Alex  Aiken.   Quanto:   Optimizing  quantum  circuits  with  automatic  generation
                  of circuit identities.  Quantum  Science  and  Technology, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.
                  1088/2058-9565/ac606d.
[Pre18]  John Preskill. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond.              Quantum, 2:79, 2018.
                  https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79.
[PRY+22]    Timothy Proctor, Kenneth Rudinger, Kevin Young, Erik Nielsen, and Robin Blume-
                  Kohout.  Measuring the capabilities of quantum computers.  Nature Physics, 18(1):75–
                  79, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-021-01409-7.

[PSI+23]      Jennifer Paykin, Albert T Schmitz, Mohannad Ibrahim, Xin-Chuan Wu, and AY Mat-
                  suura.    PCOAST:  a  Pauli-based  quantum  circuit  optimization  framework.    arXiv
                  preprint arXiv:2305.10966, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.10966.
[PT21]   Ojas  Parekh  and  Kevin  Thompson.   Application  of  the  Level-2  Quantum  Lasserre
                  Hierarchy in Quantum Approximation Algorithms. In Nikhil Bansal, Emanuela Merelli,
                  and James Worrell, editors,  48th  International  Colloquium  on  Automata,  Languages,
                  and  Programming  (ICALP  2021), volume 198 of Leibniz  International  Proceedings  in
                  Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 102:1–102:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl
                  – Leibniz-Zentrum f”ur Informatik. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2021.
                  102.
[PT22]   Ojas  Parekh  and  Kevin  Thompson.   An  optimal  product-state  approximation  for  2-
                  local  quantum  hamiltonians  with  positive  terms.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2206.08342,
                  2022.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08342.
[PWS+16]    Ojas Parekh, Jeremy Wendt, Luke Shulenburger, Andrew Landahl, Jonathan Moussa,
                  and John Aidun.  Benchmarking adiabatic quantum optimization for complex network
                  analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00319, 2016. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
                  1604.00319.


                                                           30
[PYF21]Elija  Perrier,  Akram  Youssry,  and  Chris  Ferrie.   QDataset:   Quantum  datasets  for
                  machine learning, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.06661.

[RC19]       Alessandro  Roggero  and  Joseph  Carlson.   Dynamic  linear  response  quantum  algo-
                  rithm.   Phys.  Rev.  C, 100:034610,  Sep 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.
                  100.034610.

[RDRVL14]Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O Anatole Von Lilien-
                  feld.  Quantum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules.   Scientific
                  data, 1(1):1–7, 2014.  https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2014.22.

[Rei91]   Gerhard Reinelt.  TSPLIB—a traveling salesman problem library.              ORSA  journal  on
                  computing, 3(4):376–384, 1991.  https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376.

[RK21]  Salonik  Resch  and  Ulya  R  Karpuzcu.   Benchmarking  quantum  computers  and  the
                  impact of quantum noise. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(7):1–35, 2021. https:
                  //doi.org/10.1145/3468837.

[Rof19]  Joschka  Roffe.    Quantum  error  correction:   an  introductory  guide.                Contemporary
                  Physics, 60(3):226–245, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00107514.2019.1667078.

[RWS+17]    Markus Reiher, Nathan Wiebe, Krysta M Svore, Dave Wecker, and Matthias Troyer.
                  Elucidating reaction mechanisms on quantum computers.  Proceedings of the national
                  academy  of  sciences,  114(29):7555–7560,  2017.    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
                  1619152114.

[SA70]    Maurice E Schwartz and Leland Cullen Allen. Ab initio studies of the electronic struc-
                  tures of bh3 bh2f, bhf2 and bf3. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 92(6):1466–
                  1471, 1970.  https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00709a016.

[SDC+20]     Seyon Sivarajah, Silas Dilkes, Alexander Cowtan, Will Simmons, Alec Edgington, and
                  Ross Duncan. t|ket>:  a retargetable compiler for NISQ devices.  Quantum Science and
                  Technology, 6(1):014003, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/ab8e92.

[SE20]    Nicholas H. Stair and Francesco A. Evangelista.  Exploring Hilbert space on a budget:
                  Novel benchmark set and performance metric for testing electronic structure methods
                  in the regime of strong correlation.  Journal of Chemical Physics, 153:104108, 9 2020.
                  https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0014928.

[SGH20]Nicolas PD Sawaya, Gian Giacomo Guerreschi, and Adam Holmes.  On connectivity-
                  dependent resource requirements for digital quantum simulation of d-level particles. In
                  2020 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE),
                  pages 180–190. IEEE, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1109/QCE49297.2020.00032.

[SH19]    Nicolas PD Sawaya and Joonsuk Huh.  Quantum algorithm for calculating molecular
                  vibronic  spectra.   The  journal  of  physical  chemistry  letters,  10(13):3586–3591,  2019.
                  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b01125.

[SH23]    Nicolas PD Sawaya and Joonsuk Huh.  Improved resource-tunable near-term quantum
                  algorithms  for  transition  probabilities,  with  applications  in  physics  and  variational
                  quantum  linear  algebra.    Advanced  Quantum  Technologies,  6(9),  jul  2023.   https:
                  //doi.org/10.1002/qute.202300042.

[SHE20]Nicholas H. Stair, Renke Huang, and Francesco A. Evangelista. A multireference quan-
                  tum Krylov algorithm for strongly correlated electrons. Journal of Chemical Theory and
                  Computation, 16:2236–2245, 4 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b01125.

[SIS+23]       Albert  T  Schmitz,  Mohannad  Ibrahim,  Nicolas  PD  Sawaya,  Gian  Giacomo  Guer-
                  reschi,  Jennifer Paykin,  Xin-Chuan Wu,  and AY Matsuura.  Optimization at the in-
                  terface of unitary and non-unitary quantum operations in PCOAST.   arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2305.09843, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.09843.


                                                           31
[SLS+22]      Manas  Sajjan,  Junxu  Li,  Raja  Selvarajan,  Shree  Hari  Sureshbabu,  Sumit  Suresh
                  Kale,  Rishabh  Gupta,  Vinit  Singh,  and  Sabre  Kais.   Quantum  machine  learning  for
                  chemistry and physics.  Chemical Society Reviews, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1039/
                  D2CS00203D.

[SMK+20]    Nicolas  PD  Sawaya,  Tim  Menke,  Thi  Ha  Kyaw,  Sonika  Johri,  Al’an  Aspuru-Guzik,
                  and Gian Giacomo Guerreschi. Resource-efficient digital quantum simulation of d-level
                  systems for photonic, vibrational, and spin-s hamiltonians.  npj Quantum Information,
                  6(1):1–13, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-020-0278-0.

[SMM22]Harshdeep Singh, Sabyashachi Mishra, and Sonjoy Majumder. Benchmarking of differ-
                  ent optimizers in the variational quantum algorithms for applications in quantum chem-
                  istry.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2208.10285,  2022.   https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
                  2208.10285.

[Som05]Rolando D Somma. Quantum computation, complexity, and many-body physics.               arXiv
                  preprint  quant-ph/0512209,   2005.     https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.quant-ph/
                  0512209.

[SPT21]Nicolas  PD  Sawaya,  Francesco  Paesani,  and  Daniel  P  Tabor.   Near-and  long-term
                  quantum  algorithmic  approaches  for  vibrational  spectroscopy.    Physical  Review  A,
                  104(6):062419, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.104.062419.

[SRL12]Jacob T Seeley, Martin J Richard, and Peter J Love. The Bravyi-Kitaev transformation
                  for  quantum  computation  of  electronic  structure.   The  Journal  of  chemical  physics,
                  137(22):224109, 2012.  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4768229.

[SSH22]Nicolas PD Sawaya, Albert T Schmitz, and Stuart Hadfield.  Encoding trade-offs and
                  design  toolkits  in  quantum  algorithms  for  discrete  optimization:   coloring,  routing,
                  scheduling,  and  other  problems.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2203.14432,  2022.   https://
                  doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.14432.

[SSJM21]Albert  T  Schmitz,  Nicolas  PD  Sawaya,  Sonika  Johri,  and  AY  Matsuura.    Graph
                  optimization  perspective  for  low-depth  trotter-suzuki  decomposition.   arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2103.08602, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.08602.

[SSM21]Maria Schuld, Ryan Sweke, and Johannes Jakob Meyer. Effect of data encoding on the
                  expressive power of variational quantum-machine-learning models.  Physical Review A,
                  103(3):032430, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.103.032430.
[TAM+21]    Yu  Tong,  Victor  V  Albert,  Jarrod  R  McClean,  John  Preskill,  and  Yuan  Su.   Prov-
                  ably  accurate  simulation  of  gauge  theories  and  bosonic  systems.     arXiv  preprint
                  arXiv:2110.06942, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.06942.

[TG21]  Reuben Tate and Swati Gupta.  CI-QuBe.              GitHub repository, 2021.

[TGO+22]    Teague Tomesh, Pranav Gokhale, Victory Omole, Gokul Subramanian Ravi, Kaitlin N
                  Smith, Joshua Viszlai, Xin-Chuan Wu, Nikos Hardavellas, Margaret R Martonosi, and
                  Frederic T Chong.  Supermarq:  A scalable quantum benchmark suite.  In  2022  IEEE
                  International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages
                  587–603. IEEE, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCA53966.2022.00054.

[vBLH+21]  Vera von Burg, Guang Hao Low, Thomas H”aner, Damian S Steiger, Markus Reiher,
                  Martin Roetteler, and Matthias Troyer. Quantum computing enhanced computational
                  catalysis.  Physical  Review  Research, 3(3):033055, 2021.  https://doi.org/10.1103/
                  PhysRevResearch.3.033055.

[VC05]      Frank  Verstraete  and  J  Ignacio  Cirac.   Mapping  local  hamiltonians  of  fermions  to
                  local hamiltonians of spins.  Journal of Statistical Mechanics:  Theory and Experiment,
                  2005(09):P09012, 2005.  https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2005/09/P09012.



                                                            32
[VYI20]Vladyslav  Verteletskyi,  Tzu-Ching  Yen,  and  Artur  F.  Izmaylov.   Measurement  op-
                  timization  in  the  variational  quantum  eigensolver  using  a  minimum  clique  cover.
                  The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics,  152(12),  03  2020.   https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
                  5141458.

[WBAG11]James D Whitfield, Jacob Biamonte, and Al’an Aspuru-Guzik. Simulation of electronic
                  structure hamiltonians using quantum computers.  Molecular Physics, 109(5):735–750,
                  2011.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2011.552441.

[WDC80]Edgar Bright Wilson, John Courtney Decius, and Paul C Cross.                  Molecular vibrations:
                  the theory of infrared and Raman vibrational spectra.  Courier Corporation, 1980.

[WE16] Joel J Wallman and Joseph Emerson. Noise tailoring for scalable quantum computation
                  via randomized compiling.  Physical Review A, 94(5):052325, 2016. https://doi.org/
                  10.1103/PhysRevA.94.052325.
[Wie07] Angelika Wiegele.  Biq mac library—a collection of Max-Cut and quadratic 0-1 pro-
                  gramming instances of medium size.  Preprint, 51, 2007.

[WR10] T. Werlang and Gustavo Rigolin. Thermal and magnetic quantum discord in heisenberg
                  models.  Phys.  Rev.  A, 81:044101, Apr 2010.  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.
                  81.044101.

[WRV+23]   Dian Wu, Riccardo Rossi, Filippo Vicentini, Nikita Astrakhantsev, Federico Becca, Xi-
                  aodong Cao, Juan Carrasquilla, Francesco Ferrari, Antoine Georges, Mohamed Hibat-
                  Allah, et al. Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems. arXiv preprint
                  arXiv:2302.04919, 2023.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.04919.

[WSM22]Karen  Wintersperger,  Hila  Safi,  and  Wolfgang  Mauerer.   QPU-system  co-design  for
                  quantum HPC accelerators. In Architecture of Computing Systems:  35th International
                  Conference,  ARCS  2022,  Heilbronn,  Germany,  September  13–15,  2022,  Proceedings,
                  pages 100–114. Springer, 2022.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-01580-0_8.

[WVMN19]Robert Wille, Rod Van Meter, and Yehuda Naveh.  Ibm’s qiskit tool chain:  Working
                  with and developing for real quantum computers. In 2019 Design, Automation & Test
                  in  Europe  Conference  &  Exhibition  (DATE), pages 1234–1240. IEEE, 2019.   https:
                  //doi.org/10.23919/DATE.2019.8715261.

[WZ94] Lin-Wang  Wang  and  Alex  Zunger.    Solving  Schr”odinger’s  equation  around  a  de-
                  sired energy:  Application to silicon quantum dots.  The Journal of Chemical Physics,
                  100(3):2394–2397, 1994.  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.466486.

[XK20]  Rongxin  Xia  and  Sabre  Kais.   Qubit  coupled  cluster  singles  and  doubles  variational
                  quantum  eigensolver  ansatz  for  electronic  structure  calculations.   Quantum  Science
                  and Technology, 6(1):015001, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/abb8e4.

[XLP+22]    Mingkuan Xu, Zikun Li, Oded Padon, Sina Lin, Jessica Pointing, Auguste Hirth, Henry
                  Ma,  Jens  Palsberg,  Alex  Aiken,  Umut  A  Acar,  et  al.   Quartz:  superoptimization  of
                  quantum circuits. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
                  on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 625–640, 2022.  https:
                  //doi.org/10.1145/3519939.3523433.

[XSE+21]     Xiaosi Xu, Jinzhao Sun, Suguru Endo, Ying Li, Simon C Benjamin, and Xiao Yuan.
                  Variational  algorithms  for  linear  algebra.   Science  Bulletin,  66(21):2181–2188,  2021.
                  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scib.2021.03.032.

[YADM+19] Kubra  Yeter-Aydeniz,  Eugene  F  Dumitrescu,  Alex  J  McCaskey,  Ryan  S  Bennink,
                  Raphael  C  Pooser,  and  George  Siopsis.   Scalar  quantum  field  theories  as  a  bench-
                  mark  for  near-term  quantum  computers.    Physical  Review  A,  99(3):032306,  2019.
                  https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.032306.



                                                           33
[YAGJ+21]  Kubra  Yeter-Aydeniz,   Bryan  T  Gard,   Jacek  Jakowski,   Swarnadeep  Majumder,
                  George S Barron,  George Siopsis,  Travis S Humble,  and Raphael C Pooser.  Bench-
                  marking quantum chemistry computations with variational, imaginary time evolution,
                  and Krylov space solver algorithms.   Advanced  Quantum  Technologies,  4(7):2100012,
                  2021.  https://doi.org/10.1002/qute.202100012.

[ZKE+19]    AA  Zhukov,  Evgeniy  O  Kiktenko,  AA  Elistratov,  WV  Pogosov,  and  Yu  E  Lozovik.
                  Quantum communication protocols as a benchmark for programmable quantum com-
                  puters.   Quantum  Information  Processing,  18(1):1–23,  2019.   https://doi.org/10.
                  1007/s11128-018-2091-7.

[ZKK+21]    Zi-Jian  Zhang,  Thi  Ha  Kyaw,  Jakob  S  Kottmann,  Matthias  Degroote,  and  Al’an
                  Aspuru-Guzik. Mutual information-assisted adaptive variational quantum eigensolver.
                  Quantum  Science  and  Technology,  6(3):035001,  2021.   https://doi.org/10.1088/
                  2058-9565/abf3ac.
[ZSZ22]Bingzhi  Zhang,  Akira  Sone,  and  Quntao  Zhuang.    Quantum  computational  phase
                  transition  in  combinatorial  problems.    npj  Quantum  Information,  8(1):1–11,  2022.
                  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-022-00639-8.
















































                                                           34
A    HamLib code snippets

We provide a collection of Python functions that can be used to interact with the HamLib dataset.
The code snippets are also available via:

              https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/m888/dcamps/hamlib/hamlib_snippets.py

    or

                           https://github.com/Azulene-Labs/hamlib_functions.

    The code depends on domain-specific Python packages, including NetworkX [HSS08], OpenFermion
[MRS+20], and mat2qubit [?], and some other widely used libraries.  We specifically assume that the
following imports have been made before using the functions in Sections A.1 and A.2:
import networkx   as   nx
import mat2qubit   as   m2q
import openfermion   as   of
import h5py
import numpy   as   np
import re
from qiskit . quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

A.1    Loading HDF5 file structure
We recommend using the function  print                hdf5    structure to inspect the path tree structure of the
datasets stored in the HamLib HDF5 files and get                   hdf5   keys to return a list of keys to all datasets
stored in a HamLib HDF5 file.  This list of keys can be used to extract data from the HDF5 file using
the functions provided in Section A.2.
    Both    print     hdf5   structure    and    get       hdf5   keys    make    use    of    the    decorator    function
parse   through     hdf5.
def parse_through_hdf5 ( func ):
      """Decorator function that iterates through an HDF5 file and performs
      the action specified by ‘func‘ on the internal and leaf nodes in the HDF5 file."""
      def wrapper (obj ,   path =’/’,   key = None ):
            if type( obj ) in [ h5py . _hl . group .Group ,   h5py . _hl . files . File ]:
                  for ky in obj . keys ():
                        func (obj ,   path ,   key =ky ,   leaf = False )
                        wrapper (obj =obj[ky],   path = path   +   ky   + ’/’,   key =ky)
            elif type( obj )   ==   h5py . _hl . dataset . Dataset :
                  func (obj ,   path ,   key =None ,   leaf = True )
      return wrapper

def print_hdf5_structure ( fname_hdf5 : str):
      """Print the path structure of the HDF5 file.

      Args
      ----
            fname_hdf5 (str): full path where HDF5 file is stored
      """

      @parse_through_hdf5
      def action (obj ,   path =’/’,   key =None ,   leaf = False ):
            if key is not None :
                  print(( path . count (’/’) -1)*’\t’, ’-’,   key , ’:’,   path   +   key   + ’/’)
            if leaf :
                  print(( path . count (’/’) -1)*’\t’, ’[^^DATASET^^]’)

      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            action (f[’/’])

def get_hdf5_keys ( fname_hdf5 : str):
      """Get a list of keys to all datasets stored in the HDF5 file.

      Args
      ----


                                                               35
            fname_hdf5 (str): full path where HDF5 file is stored
      """
      all_keys   =   []

      @parse_through_hdf5
      def action (obj ,   path =’/’,   key =None ,   leaf = False ):
            if leaf is True :
                  all_keys . append ( path [: -1])

      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            action (f[’/’])

      return all_keys

A.2    Loading HDF5 data
The five functions listed below can be used to load data stored at a specific key in the HDF5 file back
into an appropriate Python objects,  which respectively are a NetworkX graph,  a dictionary of grid
positions, OpenFermion operators (or qiskit SparsePauliOp operators), mat2qubit operators and a list
of clauses.
def read_graph_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str):
      """Read networkx graphs from HDF5 file at specified key. Returns a single networkx
       graph.
      """
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            G   =   nx. Graph (list(np. array (f[key ])))

      return G

def read_gridpositions_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str):
      """Read grid positions, stored as attribute of each networkx graph from HDF5 file
      at specified key. Returns grid positions of nodes associated with a single graph.
      """
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            dataset   =   f[ key ]
            gridpositions_dict   = dict( dataset . attrs . items ())

      return gridpositions_dict

def read_openfermion_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str,   optype =of. QubitOperator ):
      """Read any openfermion operator object from HDF5 file at specified key.
      ’optype’ is the op class, can be of.QubitOperator or of.FermionOperator.
      """
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’,   libver =’latest’)   as   f:
            op   =   optype (f[ key ][() ]. decode ("utf-8"))

      return op

def read_qiskit_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str):
      """
      Read the operator object from HDF5 at specified key to qiskit SparsePauliOp
      format.
      """
      def _generate_string ( term ):
            # change X0 Z3 to XIIZ
            indices   =   [
                  (m. group (1) , int(m. group (2) ))
                  for m in re. finditer (r’([A-Z])(\d+)’,   term )
            ]
            return ’’. join (
                  [next(( char for char ,   idx in indices if idx   ==   i), ’I’)
                    for i in range(max( idx for _,   idx in indices )   +   1)]
            )

      def _append_ids ( pstrings ):
            # append Ids to strings
            return [p   + ’I’ *   (max(map(len,   pstrings ))   - len(p)) for p in pstrings ]



                                                                  36
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’,   libver =’latest’)   as   f:
            pattern   = r’([\d.]+) \[([^\]]+)\]’
            matches   =   re. findall ( pattern ,   f[key ][() ]. decode ("utf-8"))

            labels   =   [ _generate_string (m [1]) for m in matches ]
            coeffs   =   [float( match [0]) for match in matches ]
            op   =   SparsePauliOp ( _append_ids ( labels ),   coeffs )
      return op

def read_mat2qubit_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str):
      """Returns mat2qubit’s qSymbOp operator from HDF5 file at specified key."""
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            op   =   m2q . qSymbOp (f[ key ][() ]. decode ("utf-8"))

      return op

def read_clause_list_hdf5 ( fname_hdf5 : str,   key : str):
      """Read clause list from HDF5 file at specified key.Returns clause list in DIMACS
      format."""
      clause_list   =   []
      with   h5py . File ( fname_hdf5 , ’r’)   as   f:
            for clause in list(np. array (f[key ])):
                  clause_list . append ([v for v in clause ])

      return clause_list

A.3    Loading and unzipping to memory
For certain workflows, especially ones targeting some of the smaller subdatasets of HamLib, we expect
that it might be useful to load the data directly from the webportal into a Python environment.  This
has an additional benefit of code portability.
    Alternatively one may download the zip files directly.  We recommend manually downloading the
larger (>100 MB) files of HamLib, as the uncompressed data is often 10x the size of the compressed
data.  Additionally, we note that for some users a manual download may be the only option—during
testing,  some  users  were  unable  to  access  HamLib  via  the  commands  below,  due  to  virtual  private
network (VPN) or related issues.
    The  code  snippet  below  provides  an  example  of  how  this  can  be  achieved.   We  note  that  this
approach loads the full zip file into memory and thus might be slow for some of the larger datasets.
import zipfile
import requests
from io import BytesIO

url   = ’https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/m888/dcamps/hamlib/test/graph/test_graph.zip’

r   =   requests . get (url ,   stream = True )
z   =   zipfile . ZipFile ( BytesIO (r. content ))

hdf5_filename   =   z. namelist () [0]
G   =   read_graph_hdf5 (z.open( hdf5_filename , ’r’), "test_graph")

A.4    Operator manipulation
The two functions below are used for reducing the size of a Hamiltonian, either by removing indices
or removing terms.  The first function will remove indices; perhaps its most important use is removing
higher-energy  orbitals  in  HamLib’s  electronic  structure  problems.   The  second  function  will  remove
smaller terms from an operator.

def remove_qindices (op ,   inds_to_remove ):
      """Removes indices (i.e. removes qubits or fermionic modes) from operator. Any
      term
      containing the given indices are removed.

      Args:
            op (inhereting from SymbolicOperator): Operator with indices to be removed



                                                                37
      Returns:
           new_op (inhereting from SymbolicOperator): New operator with indices removed
     """

      assert isinstance(op ,   SymbolicOperator )
     # assert inds_to_remove is iterable
      assert hasattr( inds_to_remove , ’__iter__’), "Input is not iterable"

      new_op   =   copy . deepcopy (op)

     for term in op. terms :
           for factor in term :
                 if factor [0] in inds_to_remove :
                       new_op . terms .pop( term )
                       break

      return new_op

def remove_smaller_values (op , thresh ):
     """Removes absolute values below given threshold"""

      assert isinstance(op ,   SymbolicOperator )

      new_op   =   copy . deepcopy (   op   )

     for term in op. terms :
           if abs(op. terms [ term ])   <   thresh :
                 new_op . terms .pop( term )

      return new_op

B    Qubit Hamiltonian metadata distributions for subdatasets

Figures 3–6 show an overview of the metadata (‘nqubits‘, ‘terms‘, and ‘one                    norm’) for respectively the
binary optimization, discrete optimization, condensed matter and chemistry subdatasets of HamLib.
These give a sense for the distribution of Hamiltonian properties present in these datasets.

















Figure  3:Distribution  of  the  number  of  qubits  (   left),  number  of  terms  (middle),  and  one  norms
(right) over all qubit Hamiltonians in the binary optimization subdataset of HamLib.


C    Number of frozen electrons

For our electronic structure Hamiltonians, the frozen orbitals counts are given in Table 1.  The number
of  frozen  electrons  is  twice  this  value.   These  values  are  required  to  determine  how  many  effective
electrons  to  include  in  a  simulation.   For  example,  the  physical  molecule  BH  contains  6  electrons.
Because  the  table  shows  that  2  electrons  were  frozen  to  produce  the  Hamiltonian,  the  user  should
implement HamLib’s BH Hamiltonian with 6-2=4 electrons.


                                                             38
Figure  4:Distribution  of  the  number  of  qubits  (   left),  number  of  terms  (middle),  and  one  norms
(right) over all qubit Hamiltonians in the discrete optimization subdataset of HamLib.

















Figure  5:Distribution  of  the  number  of  qubits  (   left),  number  of  terms  (middle),  and  one  norms
(right) over all qubit Hamiltonians in the condensed matter subdataset of HamLib.

D    Resonances in vibrational Hamiltonians

For molecular vibrational Hamiltonians, Table 2 shows how many pairs of transitions are within the
specified energy threshold.  Because near-degenerate transitions (i.e.  resonances) are difficult to treat
with classical algorithms, the number of such transitions may be used as a rough proxy for classical
hardness.























                                                            39
Figure  6:Distribution  of  the  number  of  qubits  (   left),  number  of  terms  (middle),  and  one  norms
(right) over all qubit Hamiltonians in the chemistry subdataset of HamLib.





                                 Molecule    No.  Frozen Orbitals    No.  Frozen Electrons
                                 B2                                  2                                        4
                                 BH                                 1                                        2
                                 Be2                                2                                        4
                                 BeH                               1                                        2
                                 C2                                  2                                        4
                                 CH                                 1                                        2
                                 CoH                               1                                        2
                                 Cr2                                 2                                        4
                                 CrO                               1                                        2
                                 CuC                               1                                        2
                                 F2                                  2                                        4
                                 FeC                                1                                        2
                                 H2                                  0                                        0
                                 HF                                 1                                        2
                                 Li2                                 2                                        4
                                 LiH                                1                                        2
                                 MnN                              1                                        2
                                 N2                                  2                                        4
                                 NH                                 1                                        2
                                 Na2                                2                                        4
                                 NaLi                              1                                        2
                                 NiO                               1                                        2
                                 O2                                  2                                        4
                                 O3                                  3                                        6
                                 OH                                1                                        2
                                 ScC                                1                                        2
                                 ScO                                1                                        2
                                 TiH                                1                                        2
                                 VH                                 1                                        2

Table 1:  The number of frozen orbitals and frozen electrons in HamLib’s electronic structure Hamil-
tonians.




                                                                                      40
       Molecule                    25 cm−1     10 cm−1     5 cm−1     2 cm−1     1 cm−1
       BH3                                   148              74            40            40            39
       H2CO                                  27                9              7              3              2
       BHF2                                   20                3              0              0              0
       H2CC                                  11                2              1              1              1
       H2O2                                   31              21            10              1              0
       BF3                                    106              68            44            44            44
       CH3                                     88              58            38            34            34
       CH+3                                   117              57            45            36            34
       ClCOH                                20                8              3              1              1
       FCCF                                460            252          184          102            87
       HCCH                               150            111            72            56            48
       C2H                                     25              21            21            17            11
       C2O                                     27              19            13            13            11
       CH2                                       0                0              0              0              0
       COH                                     1                0              0              0              0
       H2O                                      3                3              2              0              0
       H2S                                       4                1              0              0              0
       H+3                                         7                7              7              7              7
       HCO                                     1                0              0              0              0
       HNC                                    21              17            11            11            11
       HNO                                     1                1              0              0              0
       NH2                                       2                0              0              0              0
       O3                                         0                0              0              0              0
       SF2                                        9                0              0              0              0
       SO2                                       0                0              0              0              0
       NOH                                     0                0              0              0              0
       BeH                                       0                0              0              0              0
       BH                                        0                0              0              0              0
       CH                                        0                0              0              0              0
       CO                                        0                0              0              0              0
       F2                                          0                0              0              0              0
       HF                                        0                0              0              0              0
       Allene                              3243          1707         1224          951          791
       Cyclopropene                   2827          1030          512          181            90
       Ethylene oxide                 4090          1902          883          349          174
       Propargyl Cyanide          6611          2760         1482          564          294

Table 2:  Number of resonances in HamLib’s vibrational structure Hamiltonians.












                                                                    41