  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


         Scalable Imaginary Time Evolution with Neural Network
                                              Quantum States

                           Eimantas Ledinauskas1,2⋆ and Egidijus Anisimovas1

                1 Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astronomy, Vilnius University
                               Saul˙etekio al. 3, LT-10257, Vilnius, Lithuania
    2 Baltic Institute of Advanced Technology, Pilies St. 16-8, LT-01403, Vilnius, Lithuania
                                      ⋆ eimantas.ledinauskas@ff.stud.vu.lt

                                               November 17, 2023


Abstract

The  representation  of  a  quantum  wave  function  as  a  neural  network  quantum  state
(NQS) provides a powerful variational ansatz for finding the ground states of many-body
quantum systems.  Nevertheless, due to the complex variational landscape, traditional
methods often employ the computation of quantum geometric tensor, consequently com-
plicating optimization techniques.  Contributing to efforts aiming to formulate alterna-
tive methods, we introduce an approach that bypasses the computation of the metric ten-
sor and instead relies exclusively on first-order gradient descent with Euclidean metric.
This allows for the application of larger neural networks and the use of more standard
optimization methods from other machine learning domains.  Our approach leverages
the principle of imaginary time evolution by constructing a target wave function derived
from the Schrödinger equation, and then training the neural network to approximate
this target.  We make this method adaptive and stable by determining the optimal time
step and keeping the target fixed until the energy of the NQS decreases. We demonstrate
the benefits of our scheme via numerical experiments with 2D J1–J2  Heisenberg model,
which showcase enhanced stability and energy accuracy in comparison to direct energy
loss minimization.  Importantly, our approach displays competitiveness with the well-
established density matrix renormalization group method and NQS optimization with
stochastic reconfiguration.


Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                            2

2   Proposed method for ground state search with NQS                                           4
    2.1    Problem definition and notation                                                                  4
    2.2    Imaginary time evolution with NQS                                                                   4
    2.3    Loss function                                                                                                5
    2.4    Adaptive imaginary time step                                                                             6
    2.5    Relation between ITE loss and E loss                                                                   7
    2.6    NQS training procedure                                                                            7

3   Neural network quantum state                                                                            8
    3.1    Neural network architecture                                                                   8
    3.2    Sampling of basis states                                                                                  10


                                                           1
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



    3.3    Implementation details                                                                                 10

4   Numerical experiments                                                                         10
    4.1    J1 - J2 Heisenberg model on a 2D square lattice                                            10
    4.2    Hyperparameters                                                                          11
    4.3    Comparison with E loss                                                                                     11
    4.4    Benchmarking                                                                                   13

5   Conclusions                                                                                            15

A   Energy moments                                                                                         16

B   Gradient of ITE loss                                                                                            16

C   Relation between gradients of ITE loss and E loss                                              17

References                                                                                                                      18




1 Introduction

The remarkable accomplishments in applying machine learning techniques to a wide range
of practical [1–6    ] and curiosity-driven [7–9    ] tasks have prompted the adoption of innovative
concepts and approaches in the field of physical sciences;  see e.g. Refs. [10–15     ] for recent
physics-motivated reviews and tutorials.   In particular,  in the numerical study of quantum
many-body systems [16] one promising line of development rests on the observation that,
given a suitable many-body basis, a pure quantum-mechanical state can be represented by a
multivariate function that assigns a complex number to a given basis element.  For a typical
quantum state of interest, such a wave function is an overwhelmingly complex entity, as the
amount of information needed to fully encode a state in this manner grows exponentially with
the system size.  On the other hand, it is fitting to note that many classes of neural network
architectures are recognized [17–21     ] as efficient function approximators:  an arbitrary well-
behaved function can be represented with a desired accuracy given a sufficient number of
parameters, i.e. a sufficient neural network width or depth. Note, however, that such universal
approximation theorems [20] only establish that a representation of a given function is possible,
without providing an explicit scheme to construct such a representation.
     The idea to represent a quantum wave function as a neural network quantum state (NQS)
[11,15,22–28               ], can be viewed as a very powerful variational ansatz that aligns well with the
well-established variational Monte-Carlo (VMC) [29,30     ] techniques to search for the ground
state.   In the general application framework,  the approach typically includes the following
elements:  (I)  The  variational  wavefunction ψθ  is  parameterized  in  terms  of  the  network
weightsθ, and the expectation value of the studied Hamiltonian H (the variational energy)
E(θ) =〈ψθ|H|ψθ〉 is identified as the objective function to be minimized, i.e. the loss function.
(II) Since a direct computation of E(θ) is not feasible due to prohibitively large configuration
space, E(θ) is estimated as a stochastic average from a set of sampled configurations.  Note
that sampling can be performed either relying on a Markov chain of configurations [22,31     ] or
direct sampling from a neural network endowed with the autoregressive property [25,26,32         ].
(III) Since the variational landscapes of NQS states are rugged and difficult to navigate in the
search of the ground state (see, e.g., the study reported in Ref. [31]), the stochastic reconfig-

                                                              2
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



uration (SR) method [33,34     ] is often used instead of some variant of direct gradient-based
descent [35]. According to the geometric interpretation [36,37     ], the benefits provided by the
SR method stem from the correct determination of the non-Euclidean manifold structure of
the space of quantum states. Thus, the minimization direction suggested by the raw gradient,
−∇θ E(θ), is less meaningful than the ’natural’ Riemannian gradient [37,38     ] corrected by the
inverse of the local metric tensor G(θ).  The educated update of parameters is made along
the direction of−G−1(θ)∇θ E(θ).  However, while using the metric tensor may improve the
convergence, it comes with a substantial computational cost since the metric tensor is of the
order Nθ×Nθ, where Nθ represents the number of NQS variational parameters. Consequently,
determining and calculating the (pseudo)inverse of the metric tensor becomes computation-
ally expensive [10] and results in poor scaling with the system size [39].  This issue imposes
significant limitations on the practical size of neural networks that can be utilized.  The scal-
ing of SR can be enhanced by employing iterative solvers that avoid forming or inverting the
tensor (e.g.,  see the implementation of SR in NetKet [40,41     ]).   However,  this still adds a
significant computational cost and also increases the numerical instability, which necessitates
adding a small diagonal shift to stabilize the method, which, in turn, reduces the precision of
the estimated metric.
    An alternative approach emerged recently, in which energy is not minimized directly. Rather,
a target wave function, more proximate to the ground state, is crafted by employing the approx-
imate imaginary time evolution and the issue is reformulated into a conventional regression
problem [42–44     ]. In the present paper, we focus on this alternative methodology, refining and
integrating modifications to shape it into a novel scheme that enhances its performance and
stability. Firstly, we employ the more natural overlap loss function instead of the mean square
error loss function, as introduced in works concerned with the real-time evolution [45–47     ].
Secondly,  we derive the expression for the adaptive optimal imaginary time step.   Thirdly,
instead of updating the target wave function after each step, we fix the target for multiple
steps to stabilize the learning process and establish criteria for determining when the target
should be updated.  We also explore the relationship between our scheme and direct energy
minimization, demonstrating that they become equivalent when the target wave function is
updated after every time step. This may elucidate why utilizing energy as a loss function does
not always work well and requires more sophisticated methods like SR. Our simulations in-
dicate that, with our proposed optimization scheme, the NQS is able to avoid being trapped
in the numerous saddle points of the optimization landscape, eliminating the need for met-
ric tensor computations and operating effectively with solely first-order gradient descent. We
validate the efficacy of this scheme by applying it to the two-dimensional J1–J2  Heisenberg
model [48,49     ], demonstrating that the proposed approach is competitive with direct energy
loss minimization using first-order gradients or SR, as well as with density-matrix renormal-
ization (DMRG) [50,51     ].
    Our paper is organized as follows. Section2provides an overview of the proposed scheme
for ground-state search and describes the neural network optimization procedure.  While the
process assumes that the state is represented by a neural network, it is versatile and can be
used with diverse network architectures.  Thus, in Section3we describe the specific archi-
tecture used in our work.  It is based on a multilayer perceptron (MLP) [52] coupled with a
preprocessing step inspired by vision transformers [3,6   ]. The physical model used for testing,
i.e. the two-dimensional spin- 12  J1–J2  model, and the results of numerical experiments are
discussed in Section4. Finally, we conclude with a brief summarizing Section5. A number of
technical derivations are included in Appendices.






                                                         3
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


2 Proposed method for ground state search with NQS

2.1Problem definition and notation
The focus of our work is the ground-state search for many-particle quantum systems defined
on a lattice.  More specifically, we study two-dimensional (2D) square lattices, however, the
described methods can be straightforwardly generalized to other lattice geometries and di-
mensionalities.  In such systems, the space of quantum states can be modeled as a Cartesian
product of identical single-site state spacesH  =NNj=1H1, where N  is the number of lattice
sites andH1 is the state space characterizing a single site.
    We choose to work in the product basis|s〉 =NNj=1|sj〉, where|sj〉 corresponds to a basis
vector ofH1 on the j-th site. These basis states can be indexed with N-tuples  s = (s1, ..., sN ),
thus we can introduce the notation|s〉  =|s1, ..., sN〉.   For example, in the case of spin-1/2
particles occupying lattice sites we can choose|sj〉∈{|↑〉,|↓〉}, where|↑〉 and|↓〉 are the
eigenstates of the spin operator ˆSz. In this basis, the wave function is represented as a complex-
valued vector                                    X
                                       |ψ〉 =          ψs1,...,sNs|s1, ..., sN〉 .                                            (1)
                                               s1,...,sN
The dimension of the vector space spanned by the basis vectors|s1, ..., sN〉 grows exponentially
with increasing system size and rather quickly it becomes impractical to numerically represent
and manipulate the wave function directly as an array. To model such directly intractable sys-
tems, Ref. [22] proposed using a neural network which maps basis vectors|s1, ..., sN〉 to the
corresponding wave function amplitudesψs1,...,sN ; this representation has become known as
the NQS. The overarching motivation stems from the observation that in spite of the expo-
nential scaling of the number of basis elements, typical ground states of physically realizable
Hamiltonians have a simplified internal structure [51] that should allow for representations in
terms of a relatively small number of parameters.  On the other hand, neural networks excel
precisely at the task of finding efficient representations of intricate data structures.

2.2Imaginary time evolution with NQS

Imaginary time evolution is a well-known method for extracting the ground state from an
arbitrary initial ansatz that is not strictly orthogonal to the sought ground state. In the energy-
eigenstate basis the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is solved by:
                                                       X
                                               |ψ〉 =       Ψj(t)|ej〉                                                     (2)
                                                         j
with
                                               Ψj(t) = Ψj,0e−iEj t                                                       (3)

where  Ej,|ej〉 are the  j-th eigenvalue and eigenvector pair of the Hamiltonian  ˆH  and the
amplitudes Ψj,0 encode an arbitrary intial condition.  If we now substitute in the imaginary
timeτ = it, then with increasingτ the solution is expressed as an exponentially decaying
(rather than the usual oscillating) superposition of energy eigenstates.  The contributions of
all the excited states decay exponentially relative to the ground state|e0〉:

                                               |Ψj|
                                               |Ψ0|∝ e−(Ej−E0)τ .                                                     (4)
Thus, asτ→∞, any initial state with nonzero overlap with|e0〉 converges toward the ground
state. It is important to note that with imaginary time the evolution becomes non-unitary and
the norm of the wave function increases or decreases exponentially with time.

                                                          4
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



    In Ref. [28], the authors demonstrate that real time evolution of a quantum system can
be modeled with NQS by minimizing the error between the variational wave function and the
target wave function which is obtained with discrete ODE solver:
                                             |ψm+1〉− Φ∆t|ψm〉                                                   (5)


where Φ∆t is the discrete ODE flow operator. Minimizing this error draws the variational wave
function closer to the target, computed approximately from the Schrödinger equation, thereby
simulating the temporal evolution of the NQS. A similar approach has also been applied to
simulate imaginary time evolution [42–44     ].
    In this work, we use the Euler method to compute the target wave function:

                                            |ψT〉 =|ψ〉− ∆τ ˆH|ψ〉 ,                                                  (6)

that is, the wave function that is reached from the current wave function by a single linearized
imaginary time evolution step ∆τ.   We note that for Hamiltonians consisting of only local
terms, the matrix Hss′ =〈s| ˆH|s′〉 is sparse, i.e., given some s′, only a small number of elements
Hss′ are non-zero. This enables the efficient computation of the target wave function
                                                               X
                                      ψT (s) =ψ(s)− ∆τ              Hss′ψ(s′),                                          (7)
                                                                s′

from the current state of the neural network. We perform a single time step to obtain a target
and then train the variational NQS. Performing a second time step is not practical for large
systems, as it would necessitate an additional application of the Hamiltonian to the resulting
target wave function. This would change the copmutational complexity scaling from linear to
quadratic with respect to system size (as similarly described in Eq.18).
    As NQS cannot perfectly fit the target function, the resulting evolution is inherently noisy.
Nevertheless, Ref. [43] has established a convergence guarantee for this type of evolution.

2.3Loss function

Multiple different loss functions can be used to maximize the consistency between the current
wave function,|ψ〉, and the target wave function,|ψT〉. We experimented with several variants
and found that the following loss function based on overlap works well in practice:
                                                       |〈ψ|ψT〉|2
                                         L =− log      〈ψ|ψ〉〈ψT|ψT〉                                               (8)

where|ψ〉 denotes the NQS to be optimized and|ψT〉 denotes the target constructed by Eq. (6).
This kind of overlap loss function has been employed in previous studies within the context of
real-time evolution (e.g. [45–47     ]).  In the subsequent text, we will refer to this loss together
with the target|ψT〉 as the ITE loss.  The gradient of ITE loss with respect to the variational
NQS parametersθ can be estimated by using the following expression (derivation is presented
in the appendix, Sec.B):
                            ›∂                  •                  ›ψT (s)                    •
               ∂ L                                                             ∂                 
               ∂θ  = 2ℜ         ∂θ logψ∗(s)            ‹ψT (s)¶       ψ(s)    ∂θ logψ∗(s)         .              (9)
                                                   s−       1ψ(s) s                              s

The averages appearing in this equation can be estimated by sampling states, s, according toP
the probability distribution,|ψ(s)|2, and then utilizing〈f (s)〉s≈  1N                   s j f (s j), where s j repre-
sents individual states from a finite sample. During optimization Eq. (9) can be used directly

                                                          5
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



without actually computing the loss. The gradients of NQS ∂∂θ logψ∗(s) can be calculated by
utilizing the automatic differentiation provided by deep learning libraries.
    The intuition behind the approach can be explained as follows:  The ITE loss pushes for
an alignment between the current wave function|ψ〉 and the target|ψT〉. On the other hand,
the two states are related by an imaginary time step, hence, in the target|ψT〉 all components
spanned by low-energy eigenstates are exponentially amplified, and all components spanned
by high-energy eigenstates are exponentially suppressed.  Now, since the target is kept fixed
for a number of optimization steps, the update of the weights of the neural network encoding
the current state|ψ〉 will effectively drive towards the minimization of the state energy, i.e.,
towards the ground state.

2.4Adaptive imaginary time step
In the case of the Euler’s method, Eq. (6) can be used to obtain the following relation between
the average energy of the target wave function and imaginary time step, ∆τ:

                            〈ET〉 =〈ψT| ˆH|ψT〉〈ψT|ψT〉   =〈E〉− 2∆τ〈E2〉 + ∆τ2〈E3〉1− 2∆τ〈E〉 + ∆τ2〈E2〉                              (10)


where〈En〉 =〈ψ| ˆHn|ψ〉/〈ψ|ψ〉. Setting∂∆τ〈ET〉 = 0 one obtains a quadratic equation which
is solved by:
                                             ∆τ = B±pB2 + 4Aσ2
                                                              2A                                                           (11)
where A =〈E2〉2−〈E〉〈E3〉,  B  =〈E〉〈E2〉−〈E3〉,  andσ2  =〈E2〉−〈E〉2.   We use Eq. (11)
to find the optimal time step which minimizes the energy of the target wave function.  This
significantly accelerates the convergence to the ground state.  The energy averages required
in Eq. (10), similar to the averages appearing in Eq. (9), can be estimated by sampling basis
states s according to the probability distribution,|ψ(s)|2, and using the following equations:

                                           〈E〉 =〈Hloc(s)〉s ,                                                           (12)
                                         〈E2〉 =
|Hloc(s)|2s ,                                                       (13)
                                         〈E3〉 =
H∗loc(s) H2loc (s)s                                            (14)

where Hloc is defined by:                              X
                                          Hloc(s) =         ψ(s′)

                                                        s′  ψ(s)〈s| ˆH|s′〉                                            (15)

and H2loc is defined analogously but using  ˆH2 instead of  ˆH.  These expressions are widely
known but for the sake of completeness, the derivations are presented in AppendixA. The
computation of Hloc is efficient because in systems with local interactions (e.g. between near-
est neighbors), the Hamiltonians are represented by highly sparse matrices, and only a small
fraction of the terms in the sum need to be calculated.
    In the case of local interactions the computational complexity of Hloc scales linearly with
system size and for H2loc it scales quadratically because it requires computing nested sums
of matrix elements:
                                                X   ψ(s ′)   X
                                  H2loc(s) =         ψ(s)        Hs s ′′Hs ′′ s ′                                            (16)
                                                 s ′          s ′′
                                                       X          X
                                             =    1ψ(s)     Hs s ′′    ψ(s ′)Hs ′′ s ′                                    (17)
                                                        s ′′        s ′


                                                           6
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



where Hs s ′ =〈s| ˆH|s ′〉. This means that the computation of〈E3〉 quickly becomes impractical
with increasing system size.  However, by experimenting we found that the following expres-
sion gives sufficient accuracy for the optimal time step calculation even though it is not strictly
correct:
                                        〈E3〉≈
Hloc(s)|Hloc(s)|2s .                                            (18)
    Consequently, with this approximation, the computational complexity of all required en-
ergy moments for our method scales linearly with the system size.

2.5Relation between ITE loss and E loss

In many standard applications of NQS for the ground state search it is performed by directly
utilizing the energy as the loss function.  In that case, the gradient of the loss with respect to
variational parameters is given by:
              ∂ LE          §›                            •                  ›∂                 •“
               ∂θ   = 2ℜ        Hloc(s) ∂∂θ logψ∗(s)                           ∂θ logψ∗(s)            .           (19)
                                                            s−〈Hloc(s)〉s                          s
In this work, we refer to LE as E loss.  By plugging the expression for|ψT〉 from Eq. (7) into
Eq. (8) it can be shown that ITE loss with Euler step target becomes proportional to E loss (for
derivation see AppendixC):
                                            ∂ L                   ∂ LE
                                            ∂θ  =     ∆τ1− ∆τ〈E〉   ∂θ  .                                                (20)
So it would appear that ITE loss does not offer any advantages and it should perform more
or less the same as E loss.  However, it is only so in the case when the target wave function
|ψT〉 is updated after every optimizer step.  If instead it is held fixed for more than one step,
Eq. (20) does not apply.
    The relationship presented in Eq. (20) suggests an explanation for the poor performance
of first-order gradient descent methods within the context of NQS ground state search. Using
E loss is equivalent to fitting a constantly shifting target described by Eq. (7).  This perpetu-
ally changing target can destabilize stochastic gradient descent. A similar problem also arises
within the context of deep reinforcement learning.  For example, it is well established that
using fixed targets significantly improves the performance of deep Q learning methods [53].
Similarly, in this work, we also demonstrate in Sec.4.3that employing ITE loss with a fixed
target can enhance stability and yield lower energy errors compared to E loss.

2.6NQS training procedure

As described in Sec.2.5,  computing    |ψT〉 with the latest NQS parameters every optimizer
step would make ITE loss equivalent to E loss up to a learning-rate multiplier.  There are two
simple methods to slow down the shift of the target:  1) using a duplicate neural network
with weights given by the moving average of the neural network that is optimized; 2) using a
duplicate neural network with fixed weights that are repeatedly updated after a certain number
of optimizer steps. Both of these methods are widely used in reinforcement learning literature
within the context of action value function learning [54]. We chose to use the second method
because in that case it is straightforward to utilize the optimal time step described in Sec.2.4
and also because it is a more natural fit for evolution with discrete time steps.
    We explored various approaches to control the update frequency of the fixed parameters
and found that the following approach provides good consistency and efficiency. The target is
fixed until the mean energy of the optimized NQS becomes smaller than〈E〉−σE where〈E〉
is the energy of the fixed NQS andσE is the standard error of the mean-energy estimate.



                                                         7
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



    In this paragraph, we provide a concise summary of the training procedure that simulates
the imaginary time evolution.  Training is split into multiple epochs where each epoch corre-
sponds to a single discrete time step ∆τ. At the start of each epoch the energy moments〈E〉,
〈E2〉,〈E3〉 are estimated by sampling NE states according to the NQS with the latest parameters
and utilizing Eqs. (12), (13), and (18). These estimates are then used to calculate the adaptive
time step ∆τ that minimizes the expected energy of|ψT〉〉 given by Eq. (10).  The duplicate
NQS that is used to compute the target wave function,|ψT〉, is updated only at the start of the
epoch and is kept fixed until the next epoch.  Conceptually this can be understood as fixing
|ψT〉 until the next epoch. During the epoch, the loss function, given by Eq. (8), is gradually
minimized with stochastic gradient optimizer (ADAM [55] in our case) so the optimized NQS
becomes increasingly similar to|ψT〉 and the energy decreases. The epoch is terminated once
the energy becomes smaller than the threshold value described in the previous paragraph.
Accurately estimating the energy with a large number of basis state samples can be compu-
tationally expensive.  To address this, we reuse the samples used in gradient estimation and
then apply a running average to the resulting energies, reducing the noise.  Please note that
we employ this approximate scheme solely for energy estimation during the epoch to compare
with the threshold.  The threshold itself is computed more accurately with a large number of
samples NE, as described in the beginning of this paragraph.  A simplified pseudocode of the
training algorithm is provided in Alg.1.

Algorithm 1 NQS training with ITE loss
  NQS← RANDOMINITIALIZATION()
  for Nepochs do
      〈E〉,〈E2〉,〈E3〉,σE←  ENERGYSTATISTICS(NQS)
      ∆τ←  OPTIMALTIMESTEP(〈E〉,〈E2〉,〈E3〉)
       Ethr←〈E〉−σE
      NQSfixed←  COPY(NQS)
      smcmc←  WARMUPMCMC(NQS)    ▷ initial batch of basis states for MCMC sampling
      while〈E〉> Ethr do
           sbatch, smcmc← SAMPLEMCMC(NQS, smcmc)
           ψtarget←  COMPUTETARGET(NQSfixed, sbatch, ∆τ)
           grad←  LOSSGRADIENT(NQS,ψtarget, sbatch)
           NQS←  UPDATEPARAMETERS(NQS, grad)
           〈E〉←  MOVINGAVERAGEENERGY(NQS, sbatch)
      end while
  end for

    The optimization scheme we presented has similarities with the one described in Ref. [42].
However, we employ a different loss function, utilize different criteria for epoch termination,
and incorporate an adaptive time step, which significantly enhances the convergence rate.


3 Neural network quantum state

3.1Neural network architecture
The existing literature on NQS encompasses a wide range of neural network architectures. For
example, Ref. [56] used multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), Ref. [57] used convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), Ref. [25] used recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and Ref. [27] used trans-
formers. In this work, we chose to employ MLPs since our preliminary experiments indicated
that they offer the best balance between the required computational resources, simplicity, and

                                                       8
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



performance. We do not claim that MLPs are the best architecture for NQS and acknowledge
that a more detailed analysis is required. However, in this work, our focus is on introducing a
novel NQS training method rather than achieving the best possible performance in modeling
a specific system.  The resulting architecture imposes minimal assumptions on the physical
system, enabling its application to cases beyond the scope of this work. This includes diverse
lattice patterns, different symmetries, and varying numbers of dimensions.
    In the case of 2D spin lattice models the most straightforward way to encode the input
basis states would be to apply the following map on lattice site states:|↑〉→−1 and|↓〉→ 1.
The resulting matrix can be flattened and used as input for the first layer of MLP. However, we
discovered that a better performance can be obtained by utilizing the encoding based on 2D
patches that is used with vision transformers [3].  The matrix described above is divided into
patches of size dp× dp, which are subsequently mapped to vectors of dimension denc using a
linear transformation with trainable weights. The resulting vectors are concatenated and then
used as input for the first layer of MLP. This kind of encoding has been demonstrated to be
beneficial in image processing, not only with transformers but also with other architectures
(e.g. [6]).
    There are two general approaches for defining the output of the neural network within the
context of NQS. The first approach is to simply output a complex number that corresponds
to the amplitude of the non-normalized wave function (e.g. [22,31,58         ]).   The second ap-
proach involves factorizing the wave function into conditional factors, akin to the chain rule
of probabilities, and autoregressively generating these conditional wave functions as output
(e.g. [25,26,32         ]).   In this work,  we opted to utilize the first approach.   Nevertheless,  our
method could be applied using the second approach as well.
    For the sake of simplicity, we maintain a constant number of neurons across all hidden
layers of the MLP. The final layer of the model produces two output values. The first value rep-
resents the log-amplitude of the wave function, while the second value represents the phase.
Because only the fractions of different wave function elements have meaning, the output am-
plitudes could grow indefinitely during training. To prevent that we follow Ref. [31] and utilize
the following nonlinearity for the log-amplitude value:  f (x) = a tanh(x/a).  We set a = 20
which allows to express amplitudes within the range of 17 orders of magnitude. For the phase
value, we do not apply any nonlinearities and allow values outside the (0, 2π) range.  All of
the variational parameters of the neural network are real.  The neural network’s architecture
is illustrated in Fig.1.




















                    Figure 1: Scheme of the NQS architecture used in this work.



                                                         9
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


3.2Sampling of basis states
As described in Sec.2.3and2.4, the estimation of the gradient and energy statistics requires
sampling the basis states according to the probability distribution associated with the wave
function, p(s) =|ψ(s)|2. Due to the high dimensionality of the problem and the fact that our
NQS outputs unnormalized amplitudes, direct sampling is not feasible.  Instead, we employ
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, specifically the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
[59,60     ], which has become a standard practice in the field of NQS.
    Here we provide a brief overview of the algorithm specifically for a spin-lattice model with
fixed magnetization. Starting basis state, s0, is sampled according to the uniform distribution.
At the m-th step a new basis state candidate, s′m, is generated by randomly choosing a pair of
neighbor sites in sm−1 and interchanging their spin states. This candidate is accepted by setting
sm = s′m if u≤|ψ(s′)|2/|ψ(s)|2 where u∈ [0, 1] is a random uniform number.  If a candidate
is not accepted, then the basis state is kept unchanged:  sm = sm−1.  The algorithm proceeds
to randomly walk in the sample space and generates samples that eventually start to follow
the probability distribution|ψ(s)|2. The initial samples may follow a different distribution. To
address this, we incorporate a warm-up period lasting Nwarmup = 10d2lat steps, during which the
generated samples are discarded. To reduce sample correlation, we selectively retain samples
at a regular interval of Nskip = 4.
    To enhance the efficiency of MCMC sampling, we parallelize the algorithm by initializing
multiple random basis states and subsequently conducting independent MCMC random walks
for each of them. We also perform the warm-up period only at the beginning of the epoch and
then reuse the MCMC walker values from the last step as initial values for the current step.
These two optimizations increase the training speed by orders of magnitude. In this work, we
set the number of MCMC walkers equal to the batch size, Nb.  Consequently, we only need to
evaluate the NQS Nskip times to generate a batch of basis states sufficient for a single optimizer
step.

3.3Implementation details

The code was written in Python [61].  Numerically demanding parts were implemented by
using JAX [62] package.  Neural network computation and training parts were implemented
by using FLAX [63] and OPTAX [64] packages.  In this work, JAX was useful not only because
of its automatic differentiation but also because of its just-in-time compilation and automatic
vectorization (vmap).  With these capabilities, we could easily parallelize and optimize local
energy computation and state sampling functions which led to significant computation time
improvements.
    For SR computations we used the implementation in NETKET [40,41     ]. For exact diagonal-
ization (ED) and DMRG computations based on QUSPIN [65,66     ] and TENPY [67], we utilized
the AMD Ryzen Threadripper 2990WX CPU. NQS training was conducted using the Nvidia
RTX 4090 GPU.


4 Numerical experiments

4.1    J1 - J2 Heisenberg model on a 2D square lattice
Let us now benchmark the performance of the proposed approach by treating a specific nu-
merical example. For this purpose, we choose the two-dimensional J1–J2  Heisenberg model,





                                                       10
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



defined by the Hamiltonian
                                                X   ⃗Si·⃗Sj + J2  X    ⃗Si·⃗Sj,                                          (21)
                                       H = J1
                                                〈i j〉            〈〈i j〉〉

with⃗Sj denoting the spin- 12 operators defined on the sites (indexed by j) of 2D dlat×dlat square
lattice with periodic boundary conditions.  The model features competing antiferromagnetic
interactions:  J1 > 0 act between the nearest-neighbor spin pairs (〈i j〉), and J2 ⩾ 0 couple
the next-nearest neighboring pairs situated on the opposite ends of diagonals of the square
plaquettes.  In the absence of the second term, these nearest-neighbor interactions stabilize
the  Néel order  with  two opposite-magnetization  sublattices intertwined  in  a checkerboard
pattern. In the opposite limit of dominant long-range interactions J2≫ J1, the model features
a striped antiferromagnetic phase.  In the vicinity of the classical boundary J2/J1  = 0.5 the
model is frustrated and the exact phase diagram is subject to an ongoing debate,  see e.g.
Refs. [48,49,68         ] and references therein.
    This particular model exhibits several symmetries:  1) translation along the x-axis and y-
axis; 2) rotation by multiples of 90 degrees; 3) reflection about the x-axis, y-axis, and diagonal;
4) spin inversion; 5) SU(2) spin rotation.  These symmetries can be leveraged to effectively
reduce the dimensionality of the problem, as was done in many previous studies (e.g. [31,58     ]
and references therein).  However, in this work we do not enforce the NQS to be invariant
with respect to any of the aforementioned transformations.  By adopting this approach, we
aim to demonstrate that when utilizing large neural networks, there is no need for specialized
architectures tailored to specific systems.

4.2Hyperparameters

The values of various hyperparameters, defined in the text, are listed in Table1.  Unless ex-
plicitly stated otherwise, these values were consistently applied across all our numerical ex-
periments.
    In all our numerical experiments, we optimize NQS using ADAM optimizer with first order
gradient descent. The learning rate is adjusted using an exponential decay schedule, with the
initial learning rateα0 and the final learning rateαf.
    To identify suitable values for the neural network width (number of neurons per hidden
layer) and depth (number of hidden layers), we conducted a small grid search.  We explored
three width values (128, 256, 512) and varied the depth from 1 to 5. As a performance metric,
we utilized the achieved energy error (relative to ED results) for a 6×6 lattice with J2/J1 = 0.5.
The results are illustrated in Fig.2.  It is evident that, in general, accuracy tends to improve
with an increase in the number of parameters in the network. This is expected, as larger neural
networks possess the capacity to represent a broader subspace of all possible wave functions.
In fact, the accuracy does not appear to plateau as the network width increases. It is likely that
further improvement in accuracy can be achieved by increasing the network width even more.
However, the depth does exhibit an optimal value, as the accuracy tends to decline when the
depth exceeds 4. This is also expected since training deeper neural networks necessitates ad-
ditional techniques such as residual connections [69] or specific initialization [70]. Based on
these results, we employ a depth of 4 and a width of 512 in the subsequent numerical experi-
ments, as this configuration demonstrated the best performance. This particular network has
893994 variational parameters.

4.3Comparison with E loss

In this section,  we compare the training of NQS using our proposed method with a more
standard approach that utilizes the energy as a loss function (with and without SR). In all cases,

                                                         11
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



                                   Hyperparameter                                  symbol        value
                                    Input patch size                                   dp           2
                                 Patch encoding size                                  denc          8
                                  Training batch size                                  Nb         256
                                  Initial learning rate                                α0        10−3
                                  Final learning rate                                  αf        10−5
           Number of samples for energy statistics during training                      -         105
                 Number of samples for final energy estimation                          -         106
                          Total number of optimizer steps                               -       5· 105
                                MCMC warm-up steps                                 Nwarmup       10d2lat
                            MCMC sample skip interval                                Nskip          4

                                     Table 1:  Hyperparameters table.




















     Figure 2: Energy error dependence on neural network width (number of neurons per
     hidden layer) and depth (number of hidden layers) for NQS trained with ITE loss.
     The lattice consists of 6× 6 sites, and J2/J1  = 0.5.  The variable N  represents the
     number of lattice sites.


we investigate the performance on 6× 6 lattice, while keeping all shared hyperparameters
unchanged.   The only exceptions are for SR, where we employ vanilla stochastic gradient
descent instead of ADAM and increase the learning rate by a factor of 10.  Due to the longer
optimization time required for SR (which varies from 4 to 6 times due to the iterative solver
used), we also reduce the total number of optimizer steps by a factor of 5, bringing it down to
105. The energy error is calculated by comparing the achieved energy with ED results.
    Figure3(a) shows three energy minimization curves for each loss, with each curve repre-
senting different random initializations of the NQS variational parameters.  It is evident that
training NQS with E loss and vanilla gradient is highly unstable since the minimization curves
exhibit sudden jumps in energy and converge to significantly different energy values depend-
ing on initialization. In contrast, with ITE loss there are no abrupt energy jumps and the final
energy value has almost no dependence on the initial variational parameters.  Moreover, em-
ploying the ITE loss consistently leads to a lower final energy for the NQS compared to the E
loss approach.  This instability of training with E loss likely arises because it is equivalent to
ITE loss with a constantly changing target (see Sec.2.5).
    Figure3(b) depicts the energy error’s dependence on             J2/J1.  Given that the final energy


                                                        12
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



with E loss exhibits significant variation from run to run, we conduct 5 runs for each J2/J1
value and only plot the best result.  The figure clearly illustrates that our proposed method
achieves superior accuracy compared to E loss with vanilla gradient not only in the vicinity
of the maximum frustration point at J2/J1 = 0.5 but also over a wider parameter range. Our
method also demonstrates competitiveness with SR, achieving slightly lower energy errors at
some points and slightly higher errors at others. With all losses, a distinct trend is visible: the
energy error reaches its maximum near J2/J1 = 0.5 and subsequently decreases as it moves
further from this point. However, the trend is noisier in the case of E-loss due to the instability
of convergence.
    In terms of computational time, the proposed scheme generally takes approximately 30%
- 50% longer in practice than training with E loss and vanilla gradient.  The primary reason
for this increase is the additional energy estimation performed after each optimizer step to
determine when to update the target wave function (see Sec.2.6).  The calculation of the
loss function requires a similar amount of computation in both cases.  This is because energy
estimation in E loss and target computation in ITE loss involves computing the same terms,
namelyPs′ Hss′ψ(s′), which dominate the computational cost. Compared to SR, our proposed
method took, on average, about 5 times less computational time per iteration.  However, SR
iterations seem to be more effective in reducing energy, as the final energy accuracy achieved
in similar computation times (despite SR having 5 times fewer iterations) is comparable.

















     Figure 3: (a) Energy minimization curves for NQS trained with E loss (blue) and ITE
     loss (green). Each loss function has three curves, representing different random ini-
     tializations of NQS variational parameters. J2/J1 = 0.5 for this analysis. (b) Energy
     error dependence on J2/J1 for NQS trained with E loss (blue), ITE loss (green), and
     E loss with SR (orange). Both figures are based on a lattice size of 6×6. The variable
     N represents the number of lattice sites.


4.4Benchmarking
In this section, we benchmark NQS trained with our proposed method against the well-established
DMRG method.  We do this by investigating the relationship between the predicted ground
state energy and lattice size, specifically when exceeding the practical modeling limits of ED.
Additionally, we compare some of our results with those achieved in other studies.
    Figure4shows the predicted ground state energy dependence on lattice border length,
while keeping J2/J1 = 0.5. Since the performance of DMRG strongly depends on the number
of bond dimensions,χ, we present the data for two values: 128 and 1024. Regarding the NQS,
we observed that extending the training duration significantly can lead to a slight improvement


                                                        13
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



in the predicted energy.  As a result, we also present the data for NQS with 5· 106 optimizer
steps, which is an order of magnitude higher than our default value.  This decrease in final
energy becomes increasingly prominent with larger lattice sizes.
    From the presented data, it is evident that NQS clearly outperforms DMRG withχ = 128.
However, whenχ = 1024, the situation becomes more intricate. Both NQS and DMRG achieve
practically the same energy as ED for the 4× 4 lattice.  For the 6× 6 and 8× 8 lattices, NQS
slightly outperforms DMRG, but only when using the extended training time.  However, for
larger lattice sizes beyond 8× 8, DMRG starts to outperform NQS, and the difference appears
to grow with increasing lattice size. In the matrix product state used in DMRG, the number of
variational parameters grows proportionally with the lattice size. On the other hand, for NQS,
the number of variational parameters remains almost constant as it increases only in the first
hidden layer of the network, which represents a small fraction of the total number of param-
eters. This disparity in the scaling of variational parameters could provide an explanation for
why DMRG eventually outperforms NQS with increasing lattice size.
    Regarding the computational resources, it is hard to compare since we utilized CPU for
DMRG and GPU for NQS. However, the actual time it took to compute the models was on a
similar scale for DMRG withχ  = 1024 and NQS with 5· 106 optimizer steps (e.g.  about 20
hours for 12× 12 lattice).

















     Figure 4:  (a) Dependence of the variational ground state energy on lattice size for
     NQS  (ITE  loss)  and  DMRG.  The  blue  and  green  lines  represent  NQS  trained  for
     5· 105  and 5· 106  optimizer steps,  respectively.   The orange and red lines corre-
     spond to DMRG with 128 and 1024 bond dimensions, respectively.  In this context,
     J2/J1  = 0.5, N  denotes the number of spins, and ’lattice size’ refers to the border
     length of a square-shaped 2D lattice.  (b) Same as (a), but with energy measured
     relatively to the variational energy of DMRG with 1024 bond dimensions.

    For J2/J1 = 0.5 and 6× 6 lattice, Ref. [31] identified an energy error limit that appears
to be hard to overcome for NQS. Multiple other works [58,71,72         ],  including theirs,  have
achieved energy errors comparable to 2· 10−3, despite using different NQS architectures and
optimization procedures.  In Fig.3(b) one can see that our method also achieves a similar
value at  J2/J1  =  0.5.   After increasing the total number of optimizer steps to 5· 106,  our
method achieves 1.4· 10−3, which is still comparable.  Here we used neural networks with a
substantially larger number of variational parameters than the mentioned studies and still were
unable to significantly surpass the 2· 10−3 limit. This adds more evidence that the problem is
related to the variational landscape rather than the representation power of neural networks.
    Several studies have explored the J2− J1 model using NQS. In Table2, we present some
of the best energies per site achieved with a J2/J1 = 0.5 on a 10× 10 lattice.  All the other


                                                        14
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



studies mentioned utilized translation-invariant CNNs and incorporated various symmetries
of the physical system.  In our study, we achieved competitive results with a straightforward
and generic MLP architecture, even though we used gradient descent with Euclidean metric
and did not explicitly integrate symmetries into NQS.

                                             Method               E/N
                                       CNN, REMD [73]           −0.4736
                                         CNN, SR [58]           −0.4952
                                         CNN, SR [74]           −0.4958
                                       CNN, minSR [75]          −0.4976
                                        MLP, ITE (ours)         −0.4894

     Table  2:     Comparison  of  energy  estimates  with  NQS  for  10× 10  lattice  with
     J2/J1 = 0.5.



5 Conclusions

In this study, we proposed and analyzed an adaptive scheme for searching the ground state
with NQS, built upon the principle of imaginary time evolution. In this method, we construct
the target wave function by combining the current wave function with the discretized flow ob-
tained from the Schrödinger equation with imaginary time. Subsequently, we train the neural
network to approximate this target wave function. Through repeated iterations of this process,
the state approximated by the neural network converges to the ground state. We employ a loss
function based on the overlap of wave functions, utilize an adaptive, optimal imaginary time
step and also fix the target wave function for multiple time steps, until a decrease in energy
is observed.  Differently from the commonly used SR approach, our method uses the vanilla
gradient with Euclidean metric.
    In our exploration of the relationship between our proposed scheme and the direct mini-
mization of energy, we uncovered a potential explanation for the unstable convergence often
observed when employing energy as a loss function. Using the energy loss is equivalent to our
method but with a target that changes after every optimizer step.  The instability might arise
due to a constantly shifting target. In our approach, this issue is addressed by fixing the target
for some number of optimizer steps, resulting in a more stable training process.
    Our investigation included numerical experiments with the J1–J2 Heisenberg model on a
2D square lattice, providing compelling evidence that our method offers higher stability and
final energy accuracy than the optimization of NQS with energy as a loss function. Moreover,
it showcases competitiveness with the well-established DMRG method and NQS optimization
with SR.
    We emphasize that our numerical experiments were performed without leveraging the
symmetries of the physical system, which significantly increases the difficulty of the problem.
Yet by utilizing neural networks with a large number of parameters compared to the commonly
used values in this research area, we managed to achieve comparable accuracy to the results
reported in works that do exploit symmetries and use specialized neural network architec-
tures. This highlights the primary advantage of our proposed method: the capability to utilize
large neural networks and apply standard optimization methods from other areas of machine
learning.




                                                       15
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission


Acknowledgements

The authors express their gratitude to Julius Ruseckas and Art¯uras Acus for discussions that
prompted new insights.   Furthermore,  the authors extend their thanks to Marin Bukov for
valuable correspondence regarding QUSPIN, and to Giuseppe Carleo for useful comments.

Funding information    This work was performed under the "Universities’ Excellence Initia-
tive" programme.


A Energy moments

First, we show that the mean value corresponding to any operator,  ˆA, is equal to the mean of
its local value Aloc(s) :=P       ψ(s ′)
                               s ′ψ(s) As s ′:
                                              X    X
                         〈A〉 =〈ψ|ˆA|ψ〉 =               ψ∗(s)ψ(s ′)As s ′
                                                s   s ′            ﬁX                  ‚
                                X                  ψ(s ′)                 ψ(s ′)                              (22)
                              =      |ψ(s)|2X       ψ(s) As s ′ =          ψ(s) As s ′
                                  s             s ′                    s ′               s
                              =〈Aloc(s)〉s .

By substituting ˆA =  ˆH, we obtain Eq. (12).
    Now we show that the mean value corresponding to the product of any two operators,  ˆA
and ˆB, can also be computed with their local values:
                                     XX
                           〈ˆAˆB〉 =          ψ∗(s ′)ψ(s ′′)(AB)s ′ s ′′
                                     Xs ′Xs ′′                X
                                  =          ψ∗(s ′)ψ(s ′′)        As ′ s ˆBs s ′′
                                      s ′ s ′′                  s
                                     X                 ψ∗(s ′)       X    ψ(s ′′)                             (23)
                                  =      |ψ(s)|2X       ψ∗(s) As ′ s       ψ(s)  ˆBs s ′′
                                     Xs             s ′               s ′′
                                  =      |ψ(s)|2A∗loc(s)Bloc(s)
                                      s
                                  =〈A∗loc(s)Bloc(s)〉 .

    By substituting  ˆA =  ˆB =  ˆH, we obtain Eq. (13).  By susbstituting       ˆA =  ˆH and  ˆB =  ˆH2 we
obtain Eq. (14).
    In both derivations, we made the simplifying assumption of a normalized state,|ψ〉. How-
ever, it is clear that the same steps can be performed without this assumption, resulting in
identical final expressions.


B Gradient of ITE loss

First we split the gradient into two terms:

               ∂ L
               ∂θ  =− ∂∂θ log |〈ψ|ψT〉|2〈ψ|ψ〉〈ψT|ψT〉 = ∂∂θ log〈ψ|ψ〉− ∂∂θ log|〈ψ|ψT〉|2 ,            (24)



                                                        16
 SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



then calculate each term separately:
                                   § ∂                “
    − ∂∂θ log|〈ψ|ψT〉|2 =−2ℜ          ∂θ log〈ψ|ψT〉
                                                  1       X
                           =−2ℜ      P                         ψT (s) ∂∂θψ∗(s)
                                 (      s ′ψ∗(s ′)ψT (s ′)  s                                 )
                                              1           X                     ∂                   (25)
                          − 2ℜ     P                          |ψ(s)|2ψT (s)ψ(s)∂θ logψ∗(s)
                                      s ′|ψ(s ′)|2·ψT (s ′)ψ(s ′)s
                                             ›ψT (s)                  •
                                       1                ∂               
                          − 2ℜ‹ψT (s)¶          ψ(s)   ∂θ logψ∗(s)       ,
                                      ψ(s)  s                           s

                       ∂                         ∂  X
                      ∂θ log〈ψ|ψ〉 =     1〈ψ|ψ〉  ∂θ      ψ(s)ψ∗(s)
                                                 1    sX

                                     = 2ℜ     〈ψ|ψ〉       ψ(s) ∂∂θψ∗(s)
                                                 1    Xs                                            (26)

                                     = 2ℜ     〈ψ|ψ〉       |ψ(s)|2 ∂∂θ logψ∗(s)
                                            §›∂        s       •“
                                     = 2ℜ       ∂θ logψ∗(s)         .
                                                                s
Finally, putting these results back into Eq. (24), we obtain Eq. (9).


C Relation between gradients of ITE loss and E loss

The ratio between the target wave function [Eq. (7)   ] and the current wave function is related
to the local value of the Hamiltonian:
                                ψT (s)                     s ′  ˆHs s ′ψ(s ′)
                                 ψ(s)  =ψ(s)− ∆τPXψ(s)
                                         = 1− ∆τ        ψ(s ′)                                      (27)
                                                     s ′ ψ(s)  ˆHs s ′
                                         = 1− ∆τHloc(s) .

By substituting this ratio into Eq. (9) we obtain Eq. (20):
                       ›∂                •               ›ψT (s)                  •
            ∂ L                                                     ∂                
            ∂θ  = 2ℜ      ∂θ logψ∗(s)          ‹ψT (s)¶     ψ(s)   ∂θ logψ∗(s)       
                                            s−       1ψ(s)                           s
                       ¤›∂                      
(1− ∆τHloc(s)) ∂s                  «
                                         •
                = 2ℜ                                                ∂θ logψ∗(s)s
                           ∂θ logψ∗(s)     s−           〈1− ∆τHloc(s)〉s
                       ¤ ∆τ
Hloc(s) ∂                                               «               (28)
                = 2ℜ                   ∂θ logψ∗(s)s− ∆τ〈E〉
 ∂∂θ logψ∗(s)s
                                    §›          1− ∆τ〈E〉      •         ›∂               •“

                =      ∆τ1− ∆τ〈E〉2ℜ    Hloc(s) ∂∂θ logψ∗(s)               ∂θ logψ∗(s)
                                                                s−〈E〉                      s
                =      ∆τ       ∂ LE
                   1− ∆τ〈E〉     ∂θ  .

                                                   17
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



Here in the first line we used the result from Sec.B.


References

 [1]  Y.  LeCun,  Y.  Bengio  and  G.  Hinton,     Deep  learning,     Nature  521,  436  (2015),
       doi:10.1038      /nature14539.

 [2]  A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser and
       I.  Polosukhin,    Attention  Is  All  You  Need,    arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:1706.03762  (2017),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1706.03762.

 [3]  A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. De-
       hghani,  M.  Minderer,  G.  Heigold,  S.  Gelly,  J.  Uszkoreit  and  N.  Houlsby,    An  Image
       is  Worth  16x16  Words:   Transformers  for  Image  Recognition  at  Scale,    arXiv  e-prints
       arXiv:2010.11929 (2020), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2010.11929.

 [4]  X. Liu, F. Zhang, Z. Hou, L. Mian, Z. Wang, J. Zhang and J. Tang, Self-supervised learning:
       Generative or contrastive,   IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35,
       857 (2021), doi:10.1109      /tkde.2021.3090866.

 [5]  D. W. Otter, J. R. Medina and J. K. Kalita, A survey of the usages of deep learning for natural
       language processing,  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32,
       604 (2021), doi:10.1109      /tnnls.2020.2979670.

 [6]  A.  Trockman  and  J.  Zico  Kolter,      Patches  Are  All  You  Need?,      arXiv  e-prints
       arXiv:2201.09792 (2022), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2201.09792.

 [7]  D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. van den Driessche, J. Schrit-
       twieser,  I. Antonoglou,  V. Panneershelvam,  M. Lanctot,  S. Dieleman,  D. Grewe et al.,
       Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search,  Nature 529, 484
       (2016), doi:10.1038      /nature16961.

 [8]  D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre,
       D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, T. Lillicrap, K. Simonyan et al., A general reinforcement learning
       algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play, Science 362, 1140 (2018),
       doi:10.1126      /science.aar6404.

 [9]  J.  Perolat,  B.  D.  Vylder,  D.  Hennes,  E.  Tarassov,  F.  Strub,  V.  de  Boer,  P.  Muller,  J.  T.
       Connor,  N.  Burch,  T.  Anthony,  S.  McAleer,  R.  Elie  et  al.,     Mastering  the  game  of
       stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning,   Science 378,  990 (2022),
       doi:10.1126      /science.add4679.

[10]  P. Mehta, M. Bukov, C.-H. Wang, A. G. Day, C. Richardson, C. K. Fisher and D. J. Schwab,
       A high-bias, low-variance introduction to machine learning for physicists,  Physics Reports
       810, 1 (2019), doi:10.1016      /j.physrep.2019.03.001.

[11]  G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto and
       L. Zdeborová, Machine learning and the physical sciences, Reviews of Modern Physics 91,
       045002 (2019), doi:10.1103      /RevModPhys.91.045002.

[12]  J. Carrasquilla, Machine learning for quantum matter, Advances in Physics: X 5, 1797528
       (2020), doi:10.1080      /23746149.2020.1797528.



                                                         18
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



[13]  J. Carrasquilla and G. Torlai,  How to use neural networks to investigate quantum many-
       body physics, PRX Quantum 2, 040201 (2021), doi:10.1103      /PRXQuantum.2.040201.

[14]  T.  Neupert,  M.  H.  Fischer,  E.  Greplova,  K.  Choo  and  M.  M.  Denner,     Introduc-
       tion  to  Machine  Learning  for  the  Sciences,    arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:2102.04883  (2021),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2102.04883.

[15]  A. Dawid,  J. Arnold,  B. Requena,  A. Gresch,  M. Płodzie´n,  K. Donatella,  K. A. Nicoli,
       P.  Stornati,  R.  Koch,  M.  Büttner,  R.  Okuła,  G.  Muñoz-Gil  et  al.,   Modern  applications
       of  machine  learning  in  quantum  sciences,    arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:2204.04198  (2022),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2204.04198.

[16]  A. Avella and F. Mancini, eds., Strongly Correlated Systems: Numerical Methods, Springer
       Berlin Heidelberg, doi:10.1007      /978-3-642-35106-8(2013).

[17]  A. N. Kolmogorov,  On the representation of continuous functions of several variables as
       superpositions of continuous functions of a smaller number of variables, Doklady Akademii
       Nauk SSSR 114, 679 (1957).

[18]  K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe and H. White, Multilayer feedforward networks are universal
       approximators, Neural networks 2, 269 (1989).

[19]  G. Cybenko,  Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function,  Mathematics of
       Control, Signals, and Systems 5, 455 (1992), doi:10.1007      /bf02134016.

[20]  R. DeVore,  B. Hanin and G. Petrova,   Neural Network Approximation,   arXiv e-prints
       arXiv:2012.14501 (2020), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2012.14501.

[21]  M.  Blanchard  and  M.  Amine  Bennouna,     The  Representation  Power  of  Neural  Net-
       works:  Breaking the Curse of Dimensionality,  arXiv e-prints arXiv:2012.05451 (2020),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2012.05451.

[22]  G. Carleo and M. Troyer,  Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural
       networks, Science 355(6325), 602 (2017), doi:10.1126      /science.aag2302.

[23]  G.  Carleo,  K.  Choo,  D.  Hofmann,  J.  E.  Smith,  T.  Westerhout,  F.  Alet,  E.  J.  Davis,
       S.  Efthymiou,  I.  Glasser,  S.-H.  Lin,  M.  Mauri,  G.  Mazzola  et  al.,     NetKet:   A  ma-
       chine learning toolkit for many-body quantum systems,  SoftwareX 10, 100311 (2019),
       doi:10.1016      /j.softx.2019.100311.

[24]  F.  Vicentini,  D.  Hofmann,  A.  Szabó,  D.  Wu,  C.  Roth,  C.  Giuliani,  G.  Pescia,  J.  Nys,
       V.  Vargas-Calderón,  N.  Astrakhantsev  and  G.  Carleo,     Netket  3:   Machine  learning
       toolbox  for  many-body  quantum  systems,     SciPost  Physics  Codebases  p.  7  (2022),
       doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhysCodeb.7.

[25]  M. Hibat-Allah, M. Ganahl, L. E. Hayward, R. G. Melko and J. Carrasquilla,  Recurrent
       neural network wave functions, Physical Review Research 2, 023358 (2020).

[26]  O. Sharir, Y. Levine, N. Wies, G. Carleo and A. Shashua, Deep autoregressive models for the
       efficient variational simulation of many-body quantum systems,  Physical Review Letters
       124, 020503 (2020), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.124.020503.

[27]  L.  L.  Viteritti,  R.  Rende  and  F.  Becca,    Transformer  Variational  Wave  Functions  for
       Frustrated Quantum Spin Systems,   Physical Review Letters 130(23),  236401 (2023),
       doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.130.236401.


                                                         19
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



[28]  I. L. Gutiérrez and C. B. Mendl, Real time evolution with neural-network quantum states,
       Quantum 6, 627 (2022), doi:10.22331      /q-2022-01-20-627.

[29]  W.   M.   C.   Foulkes,    L.   Mitas,    R.   J.   Needs   and   G.   Rajagopal,         Quantum
       Monte  Carlo  simulations  of  solids,      Reviews  of  Modern  Physics  73,   33  (2001),
       doi:10.1103      /RevModPhys.73.33.

[30]  F. Becca and S. Sorella,  Quantum Monte Carlo Approaches for Correlated Systems,  Cam-
       bridge University Press, doi:10.1017      /9781316417041(2017).

[31]  M. Bukov,  M. Schmitt and M. Dupont,   Learning the ground state of a non-stoquastic
       quantum Hamiltonian in a rugged neural network landscape,   SciPost Physics 10,  147
       (2021), doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhys.10.6.147.

[32]  D. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Hu, Z. Zhao, V. M. Hur and B. K. Clark, Gauge-invariant and anyonic-
       symmetric autoregressive neural network for quantum lattice models, Physical Review Re-
       search 5, 013216 (2023), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevResearch.5.013216.

[33]  S. Sorella,  Green function monte carlo with stochastic reconfiguration,  Physical Review
       Letters 80, 4558 (1998), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.80.4558.

[34]  S. Sorella,  Generalized Lanczos algorithm for variational quantum Monte Carlo,  Physical
       Review B 64, 024512 (2001), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.64.024512.

[35]  S.  Ruder,    An  overview  of  gradient  descent  optimization  algorithms,    arXiv  e-prints
       arXiv:1609.04747 (2016), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1609.04747.

[36]  C.-Y. Park and M. J. Kastoryano,  Geometry of learning neural quantum states,  Physical
       Review Research 2, 023232 (2020), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevResearch.2.023232.

[37]  S. Amari,  Natural gradient works efficiently in learning,  Neural Computation 10, 251
       (1998), doi:10.1162      /089976698300017746.

[38]  J. Stokes, J. Izaac, N. Killoran and G. Carleo,  Quantum natural gradient,  Quantum 4,
       269 (2020), doi:10.22331      /q-2020-05-25-269.

[39]  W. Zhang, X. Xu, Z. Wu, V. Balachandran and D. Poletti,   Ground state search by local
       and sequential updates of neural network quantum states, Physical Review B 107, 165149
       (2023), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.107.165149.

[40]  G.  Carleo,  K.  Choo,  D.  Hofmann,  J.  E.  T.  Smith,  T.  Westerhout,  F.  Alet,  E.  J.  Davis,
       S.  Efthymiou,  I.  Glasser,  S.-H.  Lin,  M.  Mauri,  G.  Mazzola  et  al.,     Netket:   A  ma-
       chine learning toolkit for many-body quantum systems,   SoftwareX p. 100311 (2019),
       doi:10.1016      /j.softx.2019.100311.

[41]  F.  Vicentini,  D.  Hofmann,  A.  Szabó,  D.  Wu,  C.  Roth,  C.  Giuliani,  G.  Pescia,  J.  Nys,
       V.  Vargas-Calderón,  N.  Astrakhantsev  and  G.  Carleo,    NetKet  3:   Machine  Learning
       Toolbox  for  Many-Body  Quantum  Systems,    SciPost  Physics  Codebases  p.  7  (2022),
       doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhysCodeb.7.

[42]  D. Kochkov and B. K. Clark, Variational optimization in the AI era: Computational Graph
       States  and  Supervised  Wave-function  Optimization,    arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:1811.12423
       (2018), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1811.12423.

[43]  C.  Giuliani,  F.  Vicentini,  R.  Rossi  and  G.  Carleo,    Learning  ground  states  of  gapped
       quantum Hamiltonians with Kernel Methods,   arXiv e-prints arXiv:2303.08902 (2023),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2303.08902.

                                                         20
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



[44]  H. Atanasova, L. Bernheimer and G. Cohen, Stochastic representation of many-body quan-
       tum states, Nature Communications 14, 3601 (2023), doi:10.1038      /s41467-023-39244-
       4.

[45]  B.   Jónsson,   B.   Bauer   and   G.   Carleo,        Neural-network   states   for   the   classi-
       cal  simulation  of  quantum  computing,      arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:1808.05232  (2018),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1808.05232.

[46]  M.  Medvidovi´c  and  G.  Carleo,      Classical  variational  simulation  of  the  Quantum
       Approximate  Optimization  Algorithm,      npj  Quantum  Information  7,   101  (2021),
       doi:10.1038      /s41534-021-00440-z.

[47]  A. Sinibaldi, C. Giuliani, G. Carleo and F. Vicentini, Unbiasing time-dependent Variational
       Monte Carlo by projected quantum evolution,   arXiv e-prints arXiv:2305.14294 (2023),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2305.14294.

[48]  L. Wang and A. W. Sandvik,  Critical level crossings and gapless spin liquid in the square-
       lattice spin-1/2 J1− J2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Physical Review Letters 121, 107202
       (2018), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.121.107202.

[49]  F. Ferrari and F. Becca,  Gapless spin liquid and valence-bond solid in the J1-J2 Heisenberg
       model on the square lattice:  Insights from singlet and triplet excitations,  Physical Review
       B 102, 014417 (2020), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.102.014417.

[50]  U. Schollwöck,   The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product
       states, Annals of Physics 326(1), 96 (2011), doi:10.1016      /j.aop.2010.09.012.

[51]  R. Orús,  Tensor networks for complex quantum systems,  Nature Reviews Physics 1, 538
       (2019), doi:10.1038      /s42254-019-0086-7.

[52]  I. Goodfellow,  Y. Bengio and A. Courville,   Deep learning,   MIT press,  http://www.
       deeplearningbook.org (2016).

[53]  V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves,
       M. Riedmiller,  A. K. Fidjeland,  G. Ostrovski et al.,   Human-level control through deep
       reinforcement learning, Nature 518, 529 (2015), doi:10.1038      /nature14236.

[54]  K.  Arulkumaran,  M.  P.  Deisenroth,  M.  Brundage  and  A.  A.  Bharath,   Deep  reinforce-
       ment  learning:   A  brief  survey,     IEEE  Signal  Processing  Magazine  34,  26  (2017),
       doi:10.1109      /MSP.2017.2743240.

[55]  D. P. Kingma and J. Ba,   Adam:  A Method for Stochastic Optimization,   arXiv e-prints
       arXiv:1412.6980 (2014), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1412.6980.

[56]  H. Saito, Solving the Bose-Hubbard Model with Machine Learning, Journal of the Physical
       Society of Japan 86, 093001 (2017), doi:10.7566      /JPSJ.86.093001.

[57]  J. Stokes, J. R. Moreno, E. A. Pnevmatikakis and G. Carleo,  Phases of two-dimensional
       spinless lattice fermions with first-quantized deep neural-network quantum states, Physical
       Review B 102, 205122 (2020), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.102.205122.

[58]  K.  Choo,  T.  Neupert  and  G.  Carleo,    Two-dimensional  frustrated  J1-J2  model  studied
       with  neural  network  quantum  states,    Physical  Review  B  100(12),  125124  (2019),
       doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.100.125124.



                                                         21
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



[59]  N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller and E. Teller,  Equation
       of state calculations by fast computing machines, The Journal of Chemical Physics 21(6),
       1087 (1953), doi:10.1063      /1.1699114.

[60]  W. K. Hastings, Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications,
       Biometrika 57(1), 97 (1970), doi:10.1093      /biomet/57.1.97.

[61]  G. Van Rossum and F. L. Drake,  Python 3 Reference Manual,  CreateSpace, Scotts Valley,
       CA, ISBN 1441412697, doi:10.5555      /1593511(2009).

[62]  J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula,
       A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne and Q. Zhang, JAX: composable transfor-
       mations of Python+NumPy programs, http://github.com/google/jax (2018).

[63]  J. Heek, A. Levskaya, A. Oliver, M. Ritter, B. Rondepierre, A. Steiner and M. van Zee,
       Flax:  A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX, http://github.com/google/flax
       (2023).

[64]  I. Babuschkin, K. Baumli, A. Bell, S. Bhupatiraju, J. Bruce, P. Buchlovsky, D. Budden,
       T. Cai, A. Clark, I. Danihelka, C. Fantacci, J. Godwin et al., The DeepMind JAX Ecosystem,
       http://github.com/deepmind (2020).

[65]  P. Weinberg and M. Bukov,  QuSpin:  a Python package for dynamics and exact diagonali-
       sation of quantum many body systems. Part I: spin chains, SciPost Physics 2, 003 (2017),
       doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhys.2.1.003.

[66]  P. Weinberg and M. Bukov,  QuSpin:  a Python package for dynamics and exact diagonali-
       sation of quantum many body systems. Part II: bosons, fermions and higher spins,  SciPost
       Physics 7, 020 (2019), doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhys.7.2.020.

[67]  J.  Hauschild  and  F.  Pollmann,      Efficient  numerical  simulations  with  Tensor  Net-
       works:   Tensor  Network  Python  (TeNPy),    SciPost  Physics  Lecture  Notes  p.  5  (2018),
       doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhysLectNotes.5, Code available from                https://github.com/tenpy/
       tenpy.

[68]  Y. Nomura and M. Imada, Dirac-type nodal spin liquid revealed by refined quantum many-
       body solver using neural-network wave function, correlation ratio, and level spectroscopy,
       Physical Review X 11, 031034 (2021), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevX.11.031034.

[69]  K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren and J. Sun, Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, arXiv
       e-prints arXiv:1512.03385 (2015), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1512.03385.

[70]  L.  Xiao,   Y.  Bahri,   J.  Sohl-Dickstein,   S.  S.  Schoenholz  and  J.  Pennington,      Dy-
       namical  Isometry  and  a  Mean  Field  Theory  of  CNNs:    How  to  Train  10,000-Layer
       Vanilla  Convolutional  Neural  Networks,      arXiv  e-prints  arXiv:1806.05393  (2018),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1806.05393.

[71]  F. Ferrari, F. Becca and J. Carrasquilla, Neural Gutzwiller-projected variational wave func-
       tions, Physical Review B 100(12), 125131 (2019), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.100.125131.

[72]  A. Szabó and C. Castelnovo, Neural network wave functions and the sign problem, Physical
       Review Research 2, 033075 (2020), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevResearch.2.033075.

[73]  X. Liang, W.-Y. Liu, P.-Z. Lin, G.-C. Guo, Y.-S. Zhang and L. He, Solving frustrated quantum
       many-particle models with convolutional neural networks, Physical Review B 98, 104426
       (2018), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.98.104426.

                                                        22
  SciPost Physics                                                                                 Submission



[74]  M. Reh, M. Schmitt and M. Gärttner, Optimizing design choices for neural quantum states,
       Physical Review B 107(19), 195115 (2023), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.107.195115.

[75]  A. Chen and M. Heyl, Efficient optimization of deep neural quantum states toward machine
       precision, arXiv e-prints arXiv:2302.01941 (2023), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2302.01941.





























































                                                          23