Applicability of Measurement-based Quantum
Computation towards Physically-driven Variational
Quantum Eigensolver

                  Zheng Qin1, Xiufan Li2, Yang Zhou1,3,∗, Shikun Zhang1, Rui Li1,
                  Chunxiao Du1 and Zhisong Xiao1,4
                  1School of Physics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
                  2Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive
                  2, 117543 Singapore
                  3Research Institute for Frontier Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
                  4School of Instrument Science and Opto-Electronics Engineering, Beijing Information
                  Science and Technology University, Beijing 100192, China
                  E-mail:  yangzhou9103@buaa.edu.cn


                  Abstract.    Variational quantum algorithms are considered one of the most promising
                  methods  for  obtaining  near-term  quantum  advantages;   however,   most  of  these
                  algorithms  are  only  expressed  in  the  conventional  quantum  circuit  scheme.    The
                  roadblock  to  developing  quantum  algorithms  with  the  measurement-based  quantum
                  computation  (MBQC)  scheme  is  resource  cost.    Recently,  we  discovered  that  the
                  realization of multi-qubit rotation operations only requires a constant number of single-
                  qubit  measurements  with  the  MBQC  scheme,  providing  a  potential  advantage  in
                  terms  of  resource  cost.   The  structure  of  the  Hamiltonian  variational  ansatz  (HVA)
                  aligns  well  with  this  characteristic.    Thus,  we  propose  an  efficient  measurement-
                  based  quantum  algorithm  for  quantum  many-body  system  simulation  tasks,  called
                  measurement-based Hamiltonian variational ansatz (MBHVA). We then demonstrate
                  its effectiveness, efficiency, and advantages with the two-dimensional Heisenberg model
                  and the Fermi-Hubbard chain.  Numerical experiments show that MBHVA can have
                  similar  performance  as  circuit-based  ansatz,  and  is  expected  to  reduce  operation
                  counts  during  execution  compared  to  quantum  circuits,  bringing  the  advantage  of
                  running time.  We conclude that the MBQC scheme is potentially feasible for achieving
                  near-term quantum advantages in the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) era,
                  especially in the presence of large multi-qubit rotation operations.



Keywords:  Quantum computing, Measurement-based quantum computing, Variational
quantum algorithm.  Submitted to:  New J. Phys.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    2

1.  Introduction

     In  recent  years,  quantum  computation  has  emerged  as  a  promising  approach  for
solving  a  variety  of  classically  intractable  problems,  such  as  simulating  complicated
quantum  systems  or  solving  large-scale  linear  algebra  problems.   Constrained  by  the
number  of  qubits  and  fidelity  of  quantum  operations,  current  quantum  hardware  is
considered  to  be  in  the  noisy  intermediate-scale  quantum  (NISQ)  regime  [1].   This
has  led  to  an  interest  in  hybrid  quantum-classical  algorithms  [2],  which  embed  the
problems into short-depth parameterized quantum circuits, particularly suited to NISQ
hardware, and employ classical optimization routines to find the quantum circuits that
best solve the problem at hand.  Of these, the most promising is the variational quantum
algorithm (VQA), which is arguably the quantum analog of highly successful machine-
learning  methods  [3].    Famous  examples  of  VQA  include  the  variational  quantum
eigensolver (VQE) [4] and the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA)
[5,6].  These algorithms have been considered for a plethora of applications,  ranging
from foundational research to engineering practice.  Existing hybrid quantum-classical
algorithms are primarily theoretically formulated in circuit-based quantum computation
(CBQC). Although they may be key to obtaining near-term quantum advantages, there
are still many important challenges, including their trainability, accuracy, efficiency, and
compatibility with photonic platforms [7,8,9,10,11].
     Measurement-based  quantum  computation  (MBQC)  is  another  general  quantum
computation scheme.  In contrast to CBQC which manipulates the evolution of qubits
using  quantum  gates  to  realize  specific  computation,  MBQC  mainly  uses  resource
states  and  measurement  operations  to  accomplish  computational  tasks.   The  single-
measurement procedure can be of high fidelity and robust to environmental noise.  More
importantly,  measurement-based  VQE  (MBVQE)  is  suitable  for  achieving  quantum
advantages  on  photonic  platforms  [12, 13, 14].     At  present,  there  are  two  main
approaches  for  realizing  the  variational  quantum  computation  process  under  MBQC.
The first approach is to construct the required graph state and measurement pattern by
translating from circuit-based VQE (CBVQE). This method is simple to implement but
may result in high resource costs that the current hardware cannot afford. Here, resource
costs  refer  to  the  number  of  operations  and  qubits  required  in  the  MBQC  scheme.
Fortunately,  several  reduction  schemes  exist  for  optimizing  the  graph  state  [15, 16].
However, not all VQE ans¨atze are suitable for translation.  Both the size of the graph
state  and  measurement  patterns  are  affected  by  the  VQE  ansatz.   As  a  result,  even
if  two  converted  graph  states  are  equivalent,  their  resource  costs  may  differ.    The
second  approach  is  to  construct  the  so-called  ‘custom  state’  (or  native  graph  state)
and  ‘customized  variational  knobs’  (or  native  rotation  operations)  according  to  the
specific problems.  Recent research [17] found that resonating natively, compared with
translating circuit-based algorithms into MBQC, can significantly reduce the operation
counts  and  qubits  required.   However,  this  method  faces  significant  difficulties  in  the
direct construction of graph states.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    3

     Despite  the  difficulties  of  graph  state  constructions,  MBQC  theoretically  offers
a  primary  advantage  of  the  equivalent  execution  of  complex  quantum  gates  that  are
challenging  to  implement  with  high  fidelity.    The  evolution  process  of  MBQC  is
driven  by  consecutive  single-qubit  measurements,  which  implies  that  the  operations
of  complex  quantum  gates  in  CBQC  can  be  converted  into  a  series  of  high-fidelity
single-qubit  measurements.   For  instance,  multi-qubit  rotation  operations  that  have
a  wide  range  of  applications  in  quantum  simulation  and  algorithms  adversely  affect
computational  accuracy  owing  to  the  low  fidelity  of  the  current  physical  hardware.
However,  in  MBQC,  they  can  be  realized  by  using  multiple  high-fidelity  single-qubit
measurement  operations  and  may  lead  to  lower  resource  costs.    In  this  work,  we
will  clarify  this  point  with  the  proposed  measurement-based  Hamiltonian  variational
ansatz  (MBHVA).  With  the  help  of  Hamiltonian  variational  ansatz  (HVA),  we  can
formulate  the  mathematical  expressions  that  represent  the  unitary  operations  the
ansatz  aims  to  implement  and  construct  a  ‘native  graph  state’  according  to  the
specific  form  of  the  Hamiltonian,   thus  simultaneously  avoiding  the  difficulties  of
direct  construction  and  optimization  of  the  graph  state.     Numerical  simulations
with two paradigmatic many-body systems have demonstrated that its computational
performance is similar to circuit-based Hamiltonian variational ansatz (CBHVA) and
superior to both measurement-based hardware efficient ansatz (MBHEA) and circuit-
based  hardware  efficient  ansatz  (CBHEA).  Furthermore,  with  the  presence  of  large
multi-qubit rotation operations which is common in physically-driven ansatz, MBHVA
has less operation count than CBHVA during execution which may lead to the advantage
in running time.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  In Section2, we introduce the
basic concepts of VQE and HVA, as well as MBQC. In Section3, we demonstrate the
proposed MBHVA and verify its effectiveness and efficiency using two quantum many-
body  models:  the  two-dimensional  Heisenberg  model  and  the  Fermi-Hubbard  chain.
This section presents the main results.  Finally, in Section4, we summarize the paper
and discuss the issues of MBVQE.

2.  Theoretical background

2.1.  Variational quantum eigensolver and Hamiltonian variational ansatz

    Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) aims to compute the ground state energy
of a Hamiltonian, which is generally the first step in studying the energetic properties
of molecules and materials.  The algorithm starts by representing the Hamiltonian by
a  quantum  circuit  characterized  by  two  parts:  a  set  of  ordered  quantum  gates  often
referred to as an ‘ansatz’ and a set of parameters that determines the operation of these
quantum gates.  The number of consequential operations in a circuit is referred to as the
depth. The state of the qubits is designed to model a trial wave function, and the studied
Hamiltonian can be measured with respect to this wave function to estimate the ground
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    4

state energy.  Subsequently, a classical optimization routine is applied to determine the
optimal parameters for the quantum circuit, which minimizes the expectation value of
the Hamiltonian under the variational principle.  This process was repeated iteratively
until convergence was achieved.
     The  design  of  the  ansatz  is  at  the  core  of  the  potential  advantage  of  VQE
over  classical  methods.   The  Hamiltonian  variational  ansatz  (HVA)  [18]  is  aimed  at
constructing a series of quantum gate operations based on the specific Hamiltonian.  The
first step of constructing a quantum circuit with HVA is to decompose the Hamiltonian
into a series of local Hamiltonians using Trotter decomposition [19] as follows:

                                               H =X        Ha,                                                      (1)
                                                        a
where local Hamiltonians Ha  does not commute and is often composed of the tensor-
product of the Pauli operators σ ={I,X,Y,Z}.  For the construction of D layers, also
called the depth of the ansatz, HVA can be expressed as

                                          DY   Y                      !
                               |ψD⟩ =               exp(−iθa,dHa)        |ψ0⟩,                                   (2)
                                         d=1     a
where|ψ0⟩  is  the  ground  state  of  one  of  the  terms,  and θa,d  are  the  rotation  angles,
which are also the parameters.
     HVA has been proven particularly suitable for determining the ground state energy
of  quantum  many-body  systems,  and  it  demonstrates  strong  resilience  to  the  barren
plateau  (BP)  problem  [9, 20, 21, 22, 23].   We  used  the  Transverse  Field  Ising  Model
(TFIM)  to  illustrate  the  HVA  construction  process.   TFIM  is  a  quantum  spin  model
with two-body interactions between nearest-neighbor spins.  For simplicity, we selected
an open boundary as the boundary condition.  The Hamiltonian for the one-dimensional
TFIM is
                                    NX
                   HTFIM =−            (J·ZiZi+1 + Γ·Xi) =J·HZZ + Γ·HX,                   (3)
                                   i=1
where N  is  the  total  number  of  spins, J  represents  the  strength  of  the  spin-spin
interaction, Γ is the transverse field strength.  And Xi (Zi) donates the corresponding
Pauli operator X (Z) that acts on the i−th particle.
     According  to  Eqs.  (2)  and  (3),  we  can  represent  the  unitary  operation   U  of  the
quantum circuit as

                                          DY
                      UTFIM(β,γ) =            exp    −iβd2 HZZ      exp    −iγd2HX      ,                      (4)
                                         d=1
where βd and γd are the parameter vectors correspond to layer d.
     It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  quantum  circuit  established  by  HVA  mainly  consists
of  single-qubit  rotation  gates RX(θ)  =  exp (−iθX/2)  and  two-qubit  rotation  gates
RZZ(θ)  =  exp (−iθZ⊗Z/2).    In  general,  quantum  many-body  systems  with  more
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    5

complex Hamiltonian forms result in more complex rotation operations.  In the MBQC
scheme,  these  rotation  operations,  especially  the  multi-qubit  rotation Z  operations,
may have a more convenient physical implementation than quantum circuits.  This is
discussed in Section2.3.
     It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  depth  of  the  VQE  affects  the  expressivity  and
entanglement  capability  of  the  quantum  circuit  [24, 25].   Increasing  the  number  of
layers may improve the performance.  However, when implementing VQE on quantum
hardware, large circuit layers cause error accumulation and deviate from the theoretical
calculations [7].  Therefore,  it is important to select the appropriate depth.  For one-
dimensional  TFIM,  Ref.  [20, 26, 27]  suggest  that  HVA  can  exactly  reach  the  ground
state energy at D =N/2, where N is the number of qubits.

2.2.  Measurement-based quantum computation

   Measurement-based quantum computation (MBQC) is an alternative to the quantum
circuit model and its basic idea is that once a certain resource state is available,  the
universal  quantum  computation  can  be  executed  by  local  projective  measurements
[28, 29].   There  are  two  highly  representative  theories:  teleportation-based  quantum
computation (TQC) [30] and one-way quantum computer (1WQC) [31]. In the following,
we take 1WQC as an example to introduce MBQC in detail.

2.2.1.  Primary processes of MBQC.    For MBQC, a multi-qubit entangled state should
be prepared first as resource state.  A common type of resource state has a structure
consisting of vertices and edges just as a graph and is therefore called graph state [32,33].
Its corresponding mathematical expression is

                                   |G⟩ = Y           CZvi,vj(O       |+⟩vk)                                      (5)
                                           (vi,vj)∈E           vk∈V
whereG represents the graph,|G⟩ is the generated graph state, V  is the set of vertices,
E  is  the  set  of  edges, CZ  is  the  controlled-Z  gate  [34].  |±⟩  =     1√2(|0⟩±|1⟩)  are  the
eigenstates of the Pauli X  operator.  Both|+⟩ and|−⟩ states can serve as single-qubit
states.  In this work, we use|+⟩ without distinction.
     Once  the  resource  state  is  prepared,  the  next  step  is  to  perform  local  projective
measurements  in  a  given  sequence.    In  MBQC,  single-qubit  measurements  can  be
performed by choosing different projection planes. The measurement basis is represented
as{| ↑  (θ,φ)⟩,| ↓  (θ,φ)⟩},  specified  in  Eqs.  (6)  &  (7)  [35, 36].   They  can  also  be
abbreviated as the measurement angles (θ,φ) in the Bloch sphere. θ  θ

                  |↑ (θ,φ)⟩ = cos        2   |0⟩ +eiφsin       2   |1⟩,                                            (6)
                                           θ                     θ
                  |↓ (θ,φ)⟩ = − sin         2    |0⟩ +eiφcos       2   |1⟩.                                        (7)
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    6

     After   the   measurement,   the   quantum   state   undergoes   by-product   evolution
involving  Pauli  operations.   These  operators  in  by-product  evolution  are  called  by-
product  operators.   To  complete  the  expected  evolution  process,  the  final  step  is  to
correct the effects of these by-products.  The specific correction process is determined
by the measurement outcomes and thus is known as outcome dependence.
     For common rotation operations in variational algorithms, the byproduct operators
are  Pauli  operators,   which  can  be  swapped  with  Pauli  measurements  based  on
commutation and anti-commutation relations.  Thus, these byproduct operators can be
propagated and combined at the end of the pattern according to the CME technique [37].
After completing all measurements, corrections can be performed on the measurement
results based on the final Pauli operators that need to be corrected in the specific output
qubit.  This correction process can be classical and has a small resource overhead [38].
     In summary, the execution of MBQC tasks involves a combination of classical and
quantum processes, with the classical process determining the measurement basis based
on  the  measurement  outcomes  and  the  final  correction,  while  the  quantum  process
involves building the graph state and measurement operations.

2.2.2.  Preparation of graph states and measurement patterns.    The theoretical support
for  determining  the  optimal  graph  state  is  local  complementation  equivalence  (LC-
equivalence)  [32].   If  there  is  a  set  of  local  quantum  operations  that  can  transform
one state into another, then these two multi-particle quantum states are considered to
be LC-equivalent.  These local operations typically include single-qubit operations, such
as single-qubit quantum gates, and more general operations, such as measurements and
classical feedback.
     LC-equivalence is important for determining whether a given graph state can be
used  to  perform  a  specific  quantum  algorithm.    Specifically  speaking,  we  can  first
propose a question-driven graph state, and then try to optimize it by practically feasible
operations  with  the  least  resource  costs.   If  such  an  LC-equivalence  transformation
can  be  found,  the  computational  process  of  this  quantum  circuit  can  be  equivalently
implemented in the MBQC. For example, the Gottesmann-Knill theorem [39] shows that
local Clifford operations are equivalent to the quantum states obtained after performing
all non-adaptive measurements, which can effectively guide the optimization of the graph
state  construction  [40].   Generally,  the  preparation  of  graph  states  and  measurement
patterns consists of the following three steps.
     Step  1.   Creating  initial  graph  states  and  corresponding  measurement  patterns.
This is realized by starting with a set of qubits all in the|+⟩ state and then applying a
series of CZ gates between the qubits to form multi-qubit entangled states.
     Step  2.    Optimizing  the  graph  state  and  its  measurement  pattern  according
to  LC-equivalence.   The  optimization  objectives  are  easier  physical  implementation,
lower  resource  costs  (measurement  operations  and  number  of  qubits),  and  improved
computational fidelity.
     Step  3.   Initializing  the  input  state.   This  can  be  accomplished  by  measuring  an
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    7

additional  subset  of  qubits  in  the  graph  state,  according  to  the  setting  of  the  input
state.

2.3.  Multi-qubit rotation operations in MBQC
As  mentioned  in  the  previous  section,  a  quantum  circuit  established  by  HVA  mainly
consists of various multi-qubit rotation gates.  Among these, one of the most common is
the multi-qubit rotation Z gate RZ⊗N (θ) = exp −iθZ⊗N/2, which can be represented
in the quantum circuit as shown in Fig.1(a).  In the MBQC scheme, we can represent
it  as  Fig.1(b),  where    a  is  the  ancillary  qubit,  surrounded  by  the  relevant N  qubits.
For  such  a  graph  state,  we  can  implement  the  corresponding  multi-qubit  rotation Z
gate  with  a  single  measurement  operation  on  the  ancillary  qubit.   The  basis  of  this
measurement operation is (θ,π/2).


























                  Figure  1.    (a)  A  multi-qubit Z  rotation  gate  in  CBQC  scheme.    (b)  Schematic
                  representation  of  the  multi-qubit Z   rotation  gate  in  MBQC  scheme,   where  an
                  additional  ancillary  qubit a  is  introduced  and  a  single  measurement  on  it  enables
                  the equivalent operation.  (c) Decomposition of the multi-qubit Z  rotation gate into
                  the combination of a RZ(θ) and multiple CNOT  gates.

      However, theN-qubit state obtained by measuring this graph state is not the same
as the output state|ψout⟩ = RZ⊗N (θ)|ψin⟩.  This is because we still need to deal with
the by-product operators generated during evolution.  The actual graph state evolution
equation considering the by-product operators is

                                     |ψout⟩ = (Z⊗N)maUZ⊗N (θ)|ψin⟩,                                       (8)

where UZ⊗N (θ) represents the evolution of measuring the ancillary qubit a, ma  is the
measurement  outcome, Z⊗N  is  the  production  of  by-product  operators  [36].   There
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    8

are  two  possible  measurement  outcomes, ma  =  0  and ma  =  1.   The  correction  is
only  required  when ma  =  1.   When ma  =  0, Z⊗N  will  degenerate  into  the  identity
operator I.   This  demonstrates  that  the  correction  should  be  adjusted  according  to
specific measurement results.  Refer toAppendix Afor more details.
     In  addition,  two  other  types  of  multi-qubit  rotation  gates  are  also  common  in
quantum many-body systems:
                 RX1Z⊗nXN (θ) = exp −iθX⊗Z⊗n⊗X/2,                                           (9)
                 RY1Z⊗nYN (θ)  = exp −iθY⊗Z⊗n⊗Y/2,                                          (10)
where n  = N− 2,  and  the  subscript  of  the  Pauli  operator  indicates  the ith  qubit
associated with multi-qubit rotation operations.
     They can be realized by a multi-qubit rotation Z gate with additional single-qubit
rotation gates:

                     RX1Z⊗nXN (θ) =RY1(β)RYN (β)RZ⊗N (θ)RY1(γ)RYN (γ),                    (11)

                    RY1Z⊗nYN (θ) =RX1(γ)RXN (γ)RZ⊗N (θ)RX1(β)RXN (β),                   (12)
where β =−γ =π/2.
     The  Hamiltonians  of  quantum  many-body  systems  generally  include  long-range
interactions  which,  in  physically-driven  ansatz,  are  often  represented  by  multi-qubit
rotation operators.  Therefore, physically-driven VQE, particularly HVA, are applicable
to the MBQC scheme.  For example, the 1D-TFIM mentioned in Section2.1has a two-
qubit rotation Z gate RZZ  which is particularly suitable for using this characteristic to
design the computation process with the MBQC.
     To   explore   the   advantage   of   this   characteristic   of   MBQC   brings   to   the
computational process,  we analyze it theoretically and the following results discussed
are obtained by classical simulation rather than by real quantum hardware.

3.  Measurement-based Hamiltonian variational ansatz

    As discussed above, the quantum circuits established with HVA mainly consist of
multi-qubit  rotation  gates  whose  operation  can  be  equivalently  realized  by  a  single
measurement  on  the  ancillary  qubit  in  the  MBQC.  Therefore,  measurement-based
Hamiltonian variational ansatz (MBHVA) can be particularly suitable for finding the
ground state energy of quantum many-body systems in the NISQ era.  In this section,
we verify and demonstrate MBHVA with the two-dimensional Heisenberg model and the
Fermi-Hubbard chain respectively. The impact of noise is not considered but is discussed
in Section4.  In the following,  we refer to the HVA based on the quantum circuit as
CBHVA (circuit-based HVA) to better distinguish between the two different schemes for
construction.  PaddleQuantum [41] has been used for numerical experiments, and it is
a classical simulation platform for both computational schemes.  The Adam Optimizer
has been selected for the optimization algorithm.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver    9

























                  Figure 2.  (a) The quantum circuit construction of the CBHVA, whereθi,d represents
                  the rotation angle of each two-qubit rotation gate, and is also the variational parameter.
                  The quantum circuit within the dashed box can be repeated D times.  (b) Schematic
                  representation of the corresponding one-layer MBHVA graph state, where each node,
                  except  for  the  white  output  qubit,   is  associated  with  a  specific  operation  and
                  represented  by  different  colors.   The  measurement  order  of  the  graph  state  is  from
                  left to right.  Each solid line represents CZ  entanglement between the corresponding
                  qubits, and ˆθ is the parameter vector.  To provide a better demonstration, we introduce
                  dashed-line nodes, referred to as ‘phantom nodes’, which are just the virtual clone of
                  the node on the other end of the dashed line.


3.1.  Two-dimensional Heisenberg model

   The Heisenberg model is a paradigmatic model used in quantum magnetism studies.
To effectively verify the MBHVA, we consider a two-dimensional square lattice with a
total particle number of N  = n×n, where n is the number of particles on one side of
the lattice.  Its Hamiltonian can be written as

                                HHei =−J·X(XiXj +YiYj +ZiZj),                                (13)
                                                 ⟨i,j⟩

where⟨i,j⟩ runs over all the nearest neighbors.  Now we consider the construction of
CBHVA and MBHVA ans¨atze.
      According  to  the  rules  of  HVA  mentioned  in  Section2.1,  given  the  known  form
of the Hamiltonian of the Heisenberg model in Eq. (13),  the construction of a native
graph  state  requires  three  quantum  operations: RXX, RYY ,  and RZZ.   Owing  to  the
limitation of physical implementation, we restrict the entanglement scheme toCZ under
the  MBQC  to  quantitatively  discuss  the  theoretical  operation  count  and  verify  the
feasibility  of  MBHVA.  From  Eqs.  (11)  and  (12),    RXX  and RYY  can  be  transformed
into  a  combination  of  single  rotation  operations  and RZZ.   For  the  construction  of
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  10

the HVA, once the Hamiltonian is known,  the required operations for the system are
determined.   Subsequently,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  the  ans¨atze  for  both  CBQC  and
MBQC simultaneously, without the need to first construct a quantum circuit and then
translate it into the MBHVA. In other words, MBHVA does not rely on a specific form
of the quantum circuit and has greater versatility in designing quantum algorithms and
optimizing quantum resources.
     The quantum circuit of the CBHVA and the graph state of the MBHVA for a system
of N = 2× 2 are presented in Fig.2.  The input state   |ψin⟩ should be initialized to the
|Ψ−⟩ Bell State, according to Ref. [27].  In MBHVA, the input state is initialized to the
first qubits in the blue nodes, and their measurement patterns are shown inAppendix
B.

3.1.1.  Resource costs.   In this section, we aim to compare the required qubit number
and  quantum  operation  count  during  the  execution  process  of  these  two  different
schemes.  In our proposed ansatz, the required qubit number, including ancillary qubits,
is equal to the operation counts plus the size of the input state while the required qubit
number of circuit-based ansatz is fixed according to the problem.  Thus, we can focus
only on the operation count in the following discussion.  The number of measurement
operations in the proposed MBHVA is relatively easy to calculate.  If the goal of the
computation is to obtain the output state, the measurements of the output state can be
ignored.  In Fig.2(b), the blue and yellow nodes require four measurements, the orange
nodes require two measurements, and the green nodes require only one measurement.
Further  details  are  provided  inAppendix  B.  We  consider  the  operation  count  of  the
ansatz without the preparation of the input state because they can be the same for each
ansatz.  We first calculated the number of measurements required for adjacent particles
2× 2(     ) + 4× 2(      ) + 4× 2(      ) + 3× 1(      ) = 23 and then multiplied it by the total
number  of  edges  2n(n− 1)  in  the  two-dimensional  lattice.   The  measurement  count
for a one-layer MBHVA is 46n(n− 1).  When repeating D times, the total number of
measurements will be 46n(n− 1)D.
     As  shown  in  Fig.2(a),  the  CBHVA  requires  only  6   n(n− 1)D  gates.   We  also
notice  that  there  are  studies  on  HVA  to  reduce  the  resource  overhead  [42, 43]  by
combining the RXX, RYY , and RZZ  gates and sharing the same parameters.  However,
when implementing CBQC ans¨atze on current quantum hardware, the set of universal
quantum gates also needs to be considered, that is, the implementation of multi-qubit
rotation gates should be decomposed into combinations of single-qubit rotation gates
and two-qubit entangling gates, as shown in Fig.1(c), Eqs. (11) and (12).  Taking this
decomposition into account, the operation count of CBHVA will be 46n(n− 1)D.  The
number of single-qubit gates is 34n(n− 1), and the number of the two-qubit gates is
12n(n− 1).  This is just the same as that of our proposed MBHVA. If the graph state
is  directly  translated  from  the  quantum  circuits  without  optimizing  the  multi-qubit
rotation  gate,  the  required  number  of  measurements  can  be  up  to  94n(n− 1)D  for
eachCNOT  gate costs four measurements.  From the above discussion, we can see that
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  11

utilizing the HVA to construct native graph states results in a significant improvement
over directly translating quantum circuits in terms of operation counts.
      Although  the  operation  count  represents  only  a  part  of  the  resource  cost,  the
MBHVA  may  potentially  exhibit  significant  advantages  in  certain  scenarios.    For
instance,   considering  the  typical  physical  realization  of  CBQC  and  MBQC,  the
implementation time of each quantum gate with the superconducting platform is at the
nanosecond scale while the execution of each single-qubit measurement only needs time
at the picosecond scale with the photonic platform [44,45,46,47,48,49].  Thus, in this
case  of  the  same  operation  count,  MBHVA  requires  less  running  time  than  CBHVA.
This  advantage  in  running  time  means  a  lower  requirement  of  quantum  coherence
and less error accumulation.  Furthermore, in physical implementations, measurement-
independent  qubits  can  be  measured  simultaneously,  this  can  further  enhance  the
running  time  advantage.   We  have  provided  an  explanation  of  this  inAppendix  C,
and illustrated the correlation between the MBHVA evolution process and physics.

3.1.2.    Evaluation  of  numerical  results.   In  this  section,  we  introduce  the  V-score
method  [50]  to  evaluate  numerical  results.   It  is  particularly  suitable  for  evaluating
optimization methods in quantum many-body systems.  The definition of the V-score is

                                         V -score := N· VarE(E−E∞)2,                                           (14)

where  VarE  =⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2, E∞  serves  as  a  zero  point  of  the  energy E.   It  can  be
observed that the variational optimization method performs better when the V-score is
close to zero.













                  Figure 3.  (a) The three VQE ans¨atze results of the ground state energy of the two-
                  dimensional Heisenberg model.  The curves are composed of the average of fifty results,
                  and the horizontal axis represents the steps.  We limit the steps to 200.  (b) By using
                  the V-score as an indicator to evaluate ans¨atze, the curves are highly similar to those
                  in (a).  (c) The V-score of MBHVA varies with different depths.  The error bar for each
                  depth is indicated by the variance of ten experiments.

      For better illustration, we have set J = 1, n = 4, N = 16, and the open boundary
condition.    In  addition  to  CBHVA  and  MBHVA,  we  also  considered  the  MBVQE
proposed in Ref. [51] for comparison, whose ansatz is similar to that of hardware efficient
ansatz (HEA). Hereafter, we would refer to it as MBHEA. The one-layer building block
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  12

of the MBHEA is
                                     NY                                    !
                    UM(β,γ) =             RXi(β1,i)RZi(β2,i)RXi(β3,i)         RZ⊗N (γ),                   (15)
                                      i=1
where i runs over each qubit.
     The initial parameters are randomly given.  Each ansatz is simulated 50 times, and
the average value is taken for each iteration.  The depth of each ansatz is set to two.
The number of steps is set to 100.  Fig.3(a) and (b) show the numerical results.  The
exact ground state energy of the system, which is the baseline in Fig.3(a), is obtained
by  exact  diagonalization  (ED).  Because  we  mainly  focus  on  the  overall  trend  during
iterations and whether the specific ansatz can effectively approximate the ground state
energy,  the  results  of  the  first  20  steps  are  not  shown  in  the  figure.   We  have  found
that the ground state energy and V-score curves of MBHVA and CBHVA are similar,
and they can both effectively approach the exact ground state energy.  This is expected
because their computational processes should both be theoretically efficient.  The slight
differences are mainly due to the random assignment of the initial parameters.  Given
the same variational parameters, we have acquired the same output state by using these
two ans¨atze.  For the MBHEA, the curve is relatively flat.  After the first 20 steps, the
ground state energy computed by the MBHEA is reduced to a relatively low value, but
the subsequent optimization process may fall into a barren plateau, making it difficult
to approach the exact ground state energy.  Barren plateau is also a major problem in
VQE, and many studies have discussed it [9,10,11,52,53,54,55,56,57].  From the
perspective of the evaluation indicator V-score, MBHVA performs better than MBHEA.
These results are consistent with the comparison between HVA and HEA in quantum
circuits.
     In  addition  to  insufficient  depth,  there  are  two  main  reasons  why  the  results  of
CBHVA and MBHVA deviate slightly from the baseline.  First, this deviation can be
attributed  to  the  insufficient  number  of  steps,  which  prevents  the  results  from  fully
approaching the ground state energy.  We set the number of steps to 200 to demonstrate
the equivalence of their computations and their superior performance compared with
MBHEA.  The  second  reason  is  that  the  curve  represents  the  average  results.   Even
if  certain  experimental  results  are  already  sufficiently  close  to  the  ground  state,  the
statistical nature of the curve introduces a certain distance from the exact ground state
energy.  We can conclude that the small deviations observed in the curves of CBHVA
and MBHVA from the baseline can be attributed to the limited number of steps and
the statistical average of the computed results.

3.1.3.  Performance of variational optimization.    In addition, the number of variational
parameters  can  also  be  used  as  a  performance  index  because  it  directly  affects  the
efficiency  of  the  classical  variational  optimization.   The  total  number  of  parameters
for the MBHEA is (3N + 1)D, which does not change with the observable target.  In
our  experimental  setting  (N  =  16,D  =  2),  the  number  of  parameters  is  98.   The
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  13

number of parameters for both MBHVA and CBHVA is 6n(n− 1) = 72, which can be
easily calculated by the number of green nodes in Fig.2(b) andC1.  Because MBHEA
has  more  parameters,  it  is  significantly  slower  than  MBHVA  during  the  variational
optimization  process.   The  reason  why  MBHVA  has  better  optimization  performance
than  MBHEA  can  also  be  explained  from  the  perspective  of  expressivity.   Ref.  [24]
proposes a measure of ansatz expressivity, mainly based on the size of the state space
covered by the ansatz and the size of the entire Hilbert space of pure states.  Ref. [25]
suggests that for VQA, the best expressivity refers to the state space of the ansatz that
precisely covers the optimal point.  MBHEA has greater universality, which means that
it  can  access  a  larger  state  space  and  has  a  larger  expressivity  and  parameter  space.
However, for the ground state problem of quantum many-body systems, the problem-
inspired  MBHVA  can  provide  a  smaller  state  space  that  precisely  covers  the  optimal
point,  leading to improved performance considering both the ability and efficiency of
variational optimization.
     Finally, we study the relationship between the depth and performance of MBHVA.
We  conducted  ten  experiments  respectively  with  depths  varying  from  one  to  six  and
truncated at 100 steps.  WhenD = 1, MBHVA cannot approach the ground state energy
well, with an average ground state energy of about−25.51, and a V-score of about 1.81.
When D≥ 5, the probability of falling into barren plateaus significantly increases.  We
have excluded results that fell into barren plateaus for a fair comparison.  The results
shown in Fig.3(c) mainly focus on the range 1    < D≤  6.  Increasing the number of
layers significantly increases the operation count and the number of parameters which
would greatly increase the computational load and the probability of the appearance of
barren plateaus.  In addition, the number of layers is limited by the operation fidelity
and decoherence time of the physical hardware.  From the experimental results, it can be
concluded that selecting an appropriate number of layers is also important for MBVQE.

3.2.  Fermi-Hubbard chain
   The other system used to demonstrate our proposed MBHVA is the one-dimensional
Fermi-Hubbard chain, which can describe strong correlation effects in electronic systems,
particularly in solid-state materials.  The Hamiltonian of the Fermi-Hubbard model is
given by
                      HHub =−t· X             c†iσcjσ +c†jσciσ   +U·X        ni↑nj↓,                      (16)
                                      ⟨i,j⟩,σ                             i
where t is the hopping parameter and U  is the Coulomb interaction parameter.  We set
t =U = 1.
     Once  the  Hamiltonian  is  given,  we  can  directly  construct  the  native  graph  state
using HVA. Under the periodic boundary condition, two multi-particle interaction terms
will  appear  which  can  be  represented  by  the  operations RXZ⊗(N−3)X  and RYZ⊗(N−3)Y .
WhenN > 3, these two operations require 2×4+1 = 9 and 4×4+1 = 17 measurements
in the MBQC, while in the CBQC they need 2N + 1 and 2N + 9 gates with the same
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  14

pattern respectively.  Because the number of required operations is fixed in the MBQC,
we  can  conclude  that  the  implementation  of  these  multi-qubit  rotation  operations  is
much easier with the MBQC scheme as N  grows.  If the entanglement scheme is not
restricted to theCZ scheme, other multi-qubit rotation operations can also be achieved
with only a single measurement, as discussed inAppendix A. This would further enhance
the advantages of the MBQC.























                  Figure  4.     Schematic  representation  of  the  MBHVA  graph  state  for  the  one-
                  dimensional Fermi-Hubbard chain.  Due to the presence of single-qubit,  three-qubit,
                  and five-qubit rotation Z  operations,  we use green nodes to represent the operation
                  RZ⊗n, wheren represents the number of non-ancillary qubits involved.  The description
                  of the measurement order and phantom nodes are the same as Fig.2.

     Fig.4shows a schematic representation of the MBHVA graph state when particle
number p = 3.  According to the Jordan-Wigner (JW) transformation [58], it requires
N  =  6  qubits.   The  HVA  includes  6  single-qubit  rotation,  3  two-qubit  rotation,  8
three-qubit  rotation,  and  4  five-qubit  rotation  operations.   Thus,  in  comparison  with
the  Heisenberg  model,  an  additional  purple  node  representing RY (−π/2)RX(−π/2)
should  be  introduced.   It  requires  four  measurements  as  a  yellow  node.   According
to our schematic representation, it is straightforward to calculate the total number of
measurements required for MBHVA. We can simply multiply the measurement count
required for each real colored node by its quantity and then sum them to obtain the total
measurement count, that is 2×7(             )+4×7(        )+4×12(        )+4×5(       )+21×1(        ) = 131.
Similarly, for the CBHVA, we decompose the quantum circuit into elementary single-
qubit  rotation  gates  and  two-qubit  entangling  gates,  while  taking  into  account  the
combination of adjacent coaxial rotation gates.  After decomposition and optimization,
there are 94 single-qubit rotation gates and 70 two-qubit entangling gates, resulting in
a total of 164 operations, which is significantly larger than our native MBHVA. Because
of  the  insufficient  fidelity  of  the  current  physical  realizations  of  two-qubit  gates,  it  is
crucial to convert such a large number of two-qubit gates into single-qubit measurement
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  15

operations within the MBQC scheme.  This not only reduces the number of operations
but also mitigates error accumulation.
     The  example  of  the  Fermi-Hubbard  chain  mentioned  here  is  just  one  specific
case in the context of quantum many-body systems.  When the system’s Hamiltonian
becomes more complicated, the involved multi-qubit rotation operations become more
intricate.  According to the advantageous characteristics of implementing large multi-
qubit rotation operations with the MBQC scheme, MBHVA will have fewer operation
counts and effectively mitigate overall error accumulation compared to CBHVA.




















                  Figure 5.  V-score varies with steps for finding the ground state of the Fermi-Hubbard
                  chain using MBHVA. The curve has a smooth descent, and the shaded region represents
                  the range of variance.  The inset magnifies the interval from step 120 to 200.  At step
                  200, the V-score is sufficiently low, indicating that MBHVA can successfully approach
                  the ground state.

     We  also  have  calculated  the  V-score  for  the  case  of  particle  number p  =  3  to
demonstrate the variational optimization ability of MBHVA. The initial state is set to
|Ψ−⟩,  with  the  initial  parameters  being  randomly  assigned.   The  step  size  is  also  set
to  200,  and  the  first  20  steps  are  not  shown  in  the  figure.   The  depth  of  the  ansatz
is  also  set  to  two.   We  have  found  that  the  ground  state  energy  and  V-score  curves
of MBHVA and CBHVA are similar, and they can both effectively approach the exact
ground state energy.  Thus, we only depict the curve of MBHVA in Fig.5.  It can be
seen that as the number of steps increases, the V-score approaches zero, which indicates
that MBHVA can successfully approach the ground state.  The average V-score at step
200 is about 0.12 and the minimum value is approximately 0.025.  With more steps, the
V-score can be even smaller.  The size of the shaded area in the figure reflects the range
of  variance  at  different  steps  during  the  experiments.   Smaller  shaded  areas  indicate
greater computational stability.  This means that MBHVA also has great stability.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  16

4.  Conclusion and discussion

    Considering the fact that the realization of multi-qubit rotation operations, which
are very common in the construction of physically-driven VQE, is much easier under
the MBQC scheme, we propose the MBHVA method and verify its similar effectiveness
and efficiency as CBHVA with the two-dimensional Heisenberg model and demonstrate
its advantages in operation count with the Fermi-Hubbard chain.  On the whole, there
are twofold advantages of our proposed MBHVA. First, with the help of HVA, we can
construct the so-called ’native graph state’ easily.  The resource cost of the native graph
state  is  less  than  that  of  the  graph  state  translated  from  CBQC,  thus  reducing  the
need for graph state optimization.  Second, in the presence of large multi-qubit rotation
operations, the operation count during the execution of the MBHVA is fewer than that
of  CBHVA,  resulting  in  less  running  time.   This  advantage  in  running  time  means  a
lower requirement of quantum coherence and less error accumulation.
     It should be emphasized that in our study, we did not consider the impact of errors
in  either  system.   Owing  to  error  accumulation,  fewer  operations  may  lead  to  higher
computational fidelity and reduce the demand for coherence time.  This is an important
reason  for  studying  the  MBVQE.  According  to  the  equivalence  of  the  computation
process, commonly used quantum error mitigation techniques [59] such as post-selection
[60,61] and zero-noise extrapolation [62,63],  are theoretically applicable to MBVQE
as  well.   Studying  error  mitigation  methods  for  MBVQE  could  be  a  future  research
prospect [64].
     Furthermore,  our  work  is  a  theoretical  analysis  based  on  the CZ  entanglement
scheme  and  does  not  involve  specific  measurement  methods  for  physical  platforms.
The actual physical implementation would impose constraints on the physically-driven
approach.  Fortunately, in complex systems such as the Hubbard model or other more
complex models, the physical realization of MBHVA may offer more opportunities for
optimization.  Therefore, finding the most optimal LC-equivalent MBVQE graph states
for non-trivial problems in practice is a complex issue that requires further research.
     Last  but  not  least,  we  discuss  the  feasibility  of  actual  implementation.    From
the  perspective  of  classical  simulation,  MBQC  does  not  require  the  complete  initial
preparation  of  graph  states.   For  the  majority  of  quantum  many-body  systems,  such
as  the  Heisenberg  and  Hubbard  models  mentioned  in  our  paper,  the  worst  case  only
requires generating a graph state with N + 1 qubits, whereN  represents the number of
qubits associated with the quantum circuit scheme [65].  This is because we can entangle
the qubits required during the execution of the computation.  From the perspective of
quantum computer experiments, the feasibility of achieving large quantum graph states
has  been  demonstrated  in  [66].   In  addition,  the  progress  in  single-qubit  projection
measurement with feed-forward control further strengthens our confidence in achieving
near-term quantum advantages using MBVQE.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  17

Acknowledgement

We  acknowledge  the  helpful  discussions  with  Zhen  Chen  at  the  Beijing  Academy
of  Quantum  Information  Science  regarding  the  current  quantum  hardware.    This
work  was  supported  by  the  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  under
Grants No.61975005, Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Science under Grants
No.Y18G28, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grants No.YWF-22-L-938.

Appendix A. Measurement patterns for multi-qubit rotation operations

In Section2.1,  we mentioned that the representation of the measurement basis takes
the form of Eqs. (6) and (7).  When set   φ =π/2, the measurement basis becomes

                                        θ                  θ
                 |↑ (θ,π/2)⟩ = cos        2   |0⟩ +isin     2    |1⟩,                                         (A.1)
                                            θ                 θ
                 |↓ (θ,π/2)⟩ = − sin         2   |0⟩ +icos      2   |1⟩.                                    (A.2)

     We donate measurement plane YZ as

                                MYZ(θ) :={RX(θ)|0⟩,RX(θ)|1⟩}.                                 (A.3)

     When applyX-axis rotation gates with a rotation angle−θ to|0⟩ and|1⟩, they are θ  θ

                 RX(−θ)|0⟩ = cos         2   |0⟩ +isin     2   |1⟩,                                          (A.4)
                                          θ                  θ
                 RX(−θ)|1⟩ = − sin          2   |0⟩ +icos      2   |1⟩.                                     (A.5)

     The representations of the measurement basis in Eqs. (A.1) & (A.2) and Eqs. (A.4)
& (A.5) are identical, meaning that the measurement basis  {|↑ (θ,π/2)⟩,|↓ (θ,π/2)⟩}
is exactly
                             MYZ(−θ) :={RX(−θ)|0⟩,RX(−θ)|1⟩}.                             (A.6)
     To implement a multi-qubit rotationZ operation, we first define an input state|ψin⟩
with N  qubits.  Then, introduce an ancillary qubit, denoted as a, which is prepared in
the state|+⟩a. According to Eq. (5) and the graph structure shown in Fig.1, we entangle
the ancillary qubit a with each qubit i∈ [N] of the input state|ψin⟩ by applying a CZ
operation,  where a is the control qubit and i is the target qubit.  The corresponding
graph state is represented by

                           |G⟩ =   1√2(|0⟩a⊗|ψin⟩ +|1⟩a⊗Z⊗N|ψin⟩).                           (A.7)

     Next, we perform a measurementMYZ(−θ) using Eq. (A.6) on qubit   a.  Denote the
measurement outcome as s∈{0, 1}.  After the measurement, the output state depends
on the measurement result.
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  18

     When s = 0, the output state is

                                   |ψout⟩ = exp −iθZ⊗N/2|ψin⟩.                                    (A.8)

     When s = 1, the output state is

                                |ψout⟩ =Z⊗Nexp −iθZ⊗N/2|ψin⟩.                                (A.9)

     The  single  measurement  described  above  completes  the  multi-qubit  rotation Z
operation, and the measurement pattern is shown in Fig.A1(a). When the measurement
outcome is 1, it requires the correction of the generated by-product operator Z⊗N.

















                 Figure A1.  (a) Specific measurement pattern for multi-qubit Z  rotation operation
                 where the single measurement acts on ancillary qubit a.  (b) The extension of (a) by
                 simply modifying the corresponding entanglement scheme from CZ to CP .

     If  we  change  the  entanglement  scheme  from CZ  into CX,  then  we  can  realize
RX⊗N ;  into CY , RY ⊗N  can  be  also  realized.   In  conclusion,  by  applying  controlled-P
operation as entanglement, where P∈{X,Y,Z} is the Pauli operation, the structure
of exp −iθP⊗N/2 as Fig.A1(b) is realized by a single qubit measurement   MYZ(−θ)
to  the  ancillary  qubit.   This  demonstrates  that  MBQC  exhibits  high  flexibility  and
efficiency  in  executing  multi-qubit  rotation  operations  under  arbitrary  entanglement
schemes.

Appendix B. Measurement patterns and counts for nodes

In  our  paper,  we  proposed  that  the  node  representation  is  clear  and  intuitive  for
translating quantum circuits to graph states.  Additionally, once the measurement count
required  for  each  node  is  known,  calculating  the  total  measurement  count  becomes
straightforward.  However, it is important to know the operations represented by each
node  and  their  corresponding  measurement  patterns  to  construct  a  complete  MBQC
graph state.  Before discussing the measurement patterns and counts for each node, we
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  19

first introduce the following basic formulas:
                  HXH   =Z,                                                                                       (B.1)
                  HZH   =X,                                                                                       (B.2)
                  {X,Z} = 0.                                                                                        (B.3)
      These formulas demonstrate the conversion relationship between the Pauli X  and
Pauli Z operators, which are anti-commutative.
      Our discussion is based on the CZ entanglement scheme.  As for the measurement
pattern of the green nodes, it has already been indicated inAppendix Athat it only
requires a single measurement on the ancillary qubit.
      For the other colored nodes, we need to introduce the measurement plane XY  as

                               MXY (−θ) :={RZ(−θ)|+⟩,RZ(−θ)|−⟩}.                            (B.4)
















                  Figure  B1.   (a)  Measurement  pattern  for RX(θ)H.   Only  a  single  measurement  is
                  needed.  (b) Measurement pattern for RX(θ).  The measurement order is from left to
                  right.  (c) Measurement pattern forRY (−π/2).  The operation can be converted to the
                  combination of the former two, thus it requires four measurements.

      First, assuming that the desired operation to be performed is RX(θ)H, the output
state is
                                           |ψout⟩ =RX(θ)H|ψin⟩.                                           (B.5)
      Constructing a measurement pattern as shown in Fig.B1(a), after the measurement
is completed, the output state is

                                         |ψout⟩ =XsRX(θ)H|ψin⟩,                                        (B.6)

where Xs represents the by-product operator and is determined by the outcome of the
measurement.  Note that the aforementioned operation can be completed via a single
measurement.  To obtain the measurement pattern forRX(θ), we must removeH, which
requires an additional measurement operation.  Therefore, the measurement pattern for
RX(θ) is depicted in Fig.B1(b), and can be prepared as:

                                |ψout⟩ =Xs1RX ((−1)s0θ)HXs0H|ψin⟩,                              (B.7)
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  20

which is equal to
                                    |ψout⟩ =Xs1Zs0RX(θ)|ψin⟩,                                       (B.8)
that is to say that the operationRX(−π/2) represented by orange node should cost two
measurements.
     Next, we focus on the blue nodes that representRY (−π/2).  OperationsRY (−π/2)
andRY (π/2) are both involved in the graph state and can be discussed together.  Owing
to the limitations of the entanglement scheme, we need to decompose them further:   π  π
                 RY    −π2    =RX      2   RZ    2   RX     −π2   ,                                         (B.9)
                      π             π
                 RY    2   =RX       2   RZ    −π2   RX     −π2   .                                       (B.10)


     By utilizing Eq. (B.1 ), we can transform   RY (−π/2) and RY (π/2) as  π  π
                 RY    −π2    =RX      2   HRX      2   HRX      −π2    ,                                 (B.11)
                      π             π
                 RY    2   =RX       2   HRX      −π2   HRX      −π2    .                                 (B.12)
     This form is well-suited for constructing the measurement pattern using Eqs. (B.6)
and (B.7).  Therefore, the blue node, as shown in Fig.B1(c) requires four measurements,
and the measurement pattern takes the form:

        |ψout⟩ =Xs3RX        (−1)s2 π2−s1π          HXs2RX        (−1)s1 π2−s0π
                                                                                                  (B.13)
                  HXs1RX       (−1)s0 −π2        HXs0H|ψin⟩.

     According  to  Eqs.  (B.1),  (B.2)  and  (B.3),  after  performing  algebraic  operations,
the output state will be
                                             π            π
                    |ψout⟩ =Zs2Xs3RX          2   HRX      2   HRX      −π2   |ψin⟩,                 (B.14)

means the measurement pattern executes operations equivalent to RY (−π/2).
     Finally, we discuss the yellow and red nodes, which involve consecutive applications
of RY  and RX  operations.  By employing Eqs. (B.11) and (B.12), we can expand their
operations as
                                                      π            π
                   RY    −π2    RX    −π2    =RX       2   HRX      2   HRX(−π),                (B.15)
                           π          π                       π
                      RX    2   RY     2   =RX(π)HRX           2   HRX      −π2   .                   (B.16)
     When  two  consecutive RX  are  adjacent,  their  angles  can  be  combined,  thereby
reducing the number of measurement operations.  This holds true for quantum circuits
as well, where it can reduce the number of quantum gate operations.  By observing the
form of Eqs. (B.15) and (B.16), they are very similar to Eqs. (B.11) and (B.12).                RX
with angleπ or−π does not reduce toI, but can be represented by PauliX.  Therefore,
the yellow and red nodes also require four measurements as the blue nodes, and their
measurement patterns closely resemble the one shown in Fig.B1(c).
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  21

Appendix C. Physically-driven measurement-based evolution process


























                  Figure  C1.   A  three-dimensional  schematic  representation  of  the  one-layer  graph
                  state.  The interaction terms are effectively depicted on the nodes in the figure.

      It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  the  obtained  graph  state  of  the  MBHVA  can  also
be  understood  from  the  perspective  of  three  dimensions.   As  shown  in  Fig.C1,  the
evolution  of  the  graph  state  through  the  measurements  is  from  the  bottom  to  the
top  over  time.   The  three  dashed-line  planes  represent  three  state  stages.   The  first
state stage represents the initial state, followed by evolution via column interactions to
reach the middle stage.  Finally, the output state is obtained through evolution via row
interactions.  Nodes without dependencies, such as those in the same horizontal plane,
can simultaneously execute their measurement patterns.  In physically implementation,
this can reduce the running time of MBHVA further.  The construction of the graph
state  and  the  sequence  of  measurements  are  based  on  the  form  of  the  Hamiltonian,
which interprets the physically-driven measurement-based evolution process.

References

 [1]Brooks M 2019     Nature 574 19–22
 [2]Moll N, Barkoutsos P, Bishop L S, Chow J M, Cross A, Egger D J, Filipp S, Fuhrer A, Gambetta
       J M, Ganzhorn M et al. 2018 Quantum Science and Technology 3 030503
 [3]Cerezo  M,  Arrasmith  A,  Babbush  R,  Benjamin  S  C,  Endo  S,  Fujii  K,  McClean  J  R,  Mitarai
       K,  Yuan  X,  Cincio  L  and  others  2021  Nature  Reviews  Physics  3  625–644  publisher:  Nature
       Publishing Group
 [4]Peruzzo A, McClean J, Shadbolt P, Yung M H, Zhou X Q, Love P J, Aspuru-Guzik A and O’brien
       J L 2014 Nature communications 5 1–7 publisher:  Nature Publishing Group
 [5]Farhi E, Goldstone J and Gutmann S 2014     arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4028
 [6]Zhu L, Tang H L, Barron G S, Calderon-Vargas F, Mayhall N J, Barnes E and Economou S E
       2022 Physical Review Research 4 033029
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  22

 [7]Tilly J, Chen H, Cao S, Picozzi D, Setia K, Li Y, Grant E, Wossnig L, Rungger I, Booth G H and
        others 2022 Physics Reports 986 1–128 publisher:  Elsevier
 [8]Tilly J, Chen H, Cao S, Picozzi D, Setia K, Li Y, Grant E, Wossnig L, Rungger I, Booth G H
        et al. 2022 Physics Reports 986 1–128
 [9]McClean J R, Boixo S, Smelyanskiy V N, Babbush R and Neven H 2018     Nature communications
        9 4812
[10]Uvarov A and Biamonte J D 2021       Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 54 245301
        publisher:  IOP Publishing
[11]Bittel L and Kliesch M 2021       Physical Review Letters 127 120502 publisher:  APS
[12]Tilly J, Chen H, Cao S, Picozzi D, Setia K, Li Y, Grant E, Wossnig L, Rungger I, Booth G H
        et al. 2022 Physics Reports 986 1–128
[13]Arzani F 2021       Quantum Views 5 51
[14]Kashif M and Al-Kuwari S 2023       IEEE Access 11 90105–90130
[15]Lee W R, Qin Z, Raussendorf R, Sela E and Scarola V 2022       Physical Review Research 4 L032013
        publisher:  APS
[16]Marqversen F K and Zinner N T 2023       arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00795
[17]Proietti M, Cerocchi F and Dispenza M 2022       Physical Review A 106 022437 publisher:  APS
[18]Wecker D, Hastings M B and Troyer M 2015       Physical Review A 92 042303 publisher:  APS
[19]Suzuki M 1976       Communications in Mathematical Physics 51 183–190
[20]Wiersema R, Zhou C, de Sereville Y, Carrasquilla J F, Kim Y B and Yuen H 2020       PRX Quantum
        1 020319
[21]Park C Y and Killoran N 2024       Quantum 8 1239
[22]Holmes Z, Sharma K, Cerezo M and Coles P J 2022       PRX Quantum 3 010313
[23]Mele A A, Mbeng G B, Santoro G E, Collura M and Torta P 2022       Physical Review A 106 L060401
[24]Sim  S,  Johnson  P  D  and  Aspuru-Guzik  A  2019        Advanced  Quantum  Technologies  2  1900070
        publisher:  Wiley Online Library
[25]Du Y, Tu Z, Yuan X and Tao D 2022       Physical Review Letters 128 080506
[26]Mbeng G B, Fazio R and Santoro G 2019       arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08948
[27]Ho W W and Hsieh T H 2019       SciPost Physics 6 029
[28]Raussendorf R, Browne D E and Briegel H J 2003       Physical review A 68 022312 publisher:  APS
[29]Wei T C 2021       arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10111
[30]Gottesman D and Chuang I L 1999       Nature 402 390–393 publisher:  Nature Publishing Group
[31]Raussendorf R and Briegel H J 2001       Physical Review Letters 86 5188–91
[32]Hein M, Eisert J and Briegel H J 2004       Physical Review A 69 062311
[33]Hein M, D¨ur W, Eisert J, Raussendorf R, den Nest M and Briegel H 2005       arXiv preprint quant-
        ph/0602096
[34]Van  den  Nest  M,  Miyake  A,  D¨ur  W  and  Briegel  H  J  2006        Physical  review  letters  97  150504
        publisher:  APS
[35]Browne D and Briegel H 2016       Quantum  information:  From  foundations  to  quantum  technology
        applications  449–473
[36]Sehrawat A, Zemann D and Englert B G 2011       Physical Review A 83 022317
[37]Danos V, Kashefi E and Panangaden P 2007       Journal of the ACM (JACM) 54 8–es
[38]Yamasaki H, Fukui K, Takeuchi Y, Tani S and Koashi M 2020       arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05416
[39]Aaronson S and Gottesman D 2004       Physical Review A 70 052328
[40]Van den Nest M, Dehaene J and De Moor B 2004       Physical Review A 69 022316
[41]2020 Paddle Quantum URL       https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/Quantum
[42]Feulner V and Hartmann M J 2022       Physical Review B 106 144426
[43]Martin B A, Simon P and Ranˇci´c M J 2022       Physical Review Research 4 023190
[44]Kjaergaard M, Schwartz M E, Braum¨uller J, Krantz P, Wang J I J, Gustavsson S and Oliver W D
        2020 Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11 369–395
[45]Barends R, Kelly J, Megrant A, Veitia A, Sank D, Jeffrey E, White T C, Mutus J, Fowler A G,
Applicability of MBQC towards Physically-driven Variational Quantum Eigensolver  23

        Campbell B et al. 2014 Nature 508 500–503
[46]Walter T, Kurpiers P, Gasparinetti S, Magnard P, Potoˇcnik A, Salath´e Y, Pechal M, Mondal M,
        Oppliger M, Eichler C et al. 2017 Physical Review Applied 7 054020
[47]Flamini F, Spagnolo N and Sciarrino F 2018       Reports on Progress in Physics 82 016001
[48]Marsili F, Verma V B, Stern J A, Harrington S, Lita A E, Gerrits T, Vayshenker I, Baek B, Shaw
        M D, Mirin R P et al. 2013 Nature Photonics 7 210–214
[49]Qiang X, Zhou X, Wang J, Wilkes C M, Loke T, O’Gara S, Kling L, Marshall G D, Santagati R,
        Ralph T C et al. 2018 Nature photonics 12 534–539
[50]Wu D, Rossi R, Vicentini F, Astrakhantsev N, Becca F, Cao X, Carrasquilla J, Ferrari F, Georges
        A, Hibat-Allah M et al. 2023 arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04919
[51]Ferguson R R, Dellantonio L, Al Balushi A, Jansen K, D¨ur W and Muschik C A 2021       Physical
        review letters 126 220501 publisher:  APS
[52]Grimsley  H  R,  Barron  G  S,  Barnes  E,  Economou  S  E  and  Mayhall  N  J  2022        arXiv  preprint
        arXiv:2204.07179
[53]Uvarov A, Biamonte J D and Yudin D 2020       Physical Review B 102 075104
[54]Liu X, Liu G, Huang J and Wang X 2022       arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13539
[55]Sack S H, Medina R A, Michailidis A A, Kueng R and Serbyn M 2022       PRX Quantum 3 020365
[56]Grimsley  H  R,  Barron  G  S,  Barnes  E,  Economou  S  E  and  Mayhall  N  J  2023        npj  Quantum
        Information 9 19
[57]Park C Y and Killoran N 2023       arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08529
[58]Jordan P and Wigner E P 1993        ¨Uber das paulische ¨aquivalenzverbot  (Springer)
[59]Cai Z, Babbush R, Benjamin S C, Endo S, Huggins W J, Li Y, McClean J R and O’Brien T E
        2022 arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00921
[60]Gottesman   D   1997        Stabilizer   codes   and   quantum   error   correction   (California   Institute   of
        Technology)
[61]McArdle S, Yuan X and Benjamin S 2019       Physical review letters 122 180501
[62]Li Y and Benjamin S C 2017       Physical Review X  7 021050
[63]Temme K, Bravyi S and Gambetta J M 2017       Physical review letters 119 180509
[64]Larsen M V, Chamberland C, Noh K, Neergaard-Nielsen J S and Andersen U L 2021       Prx Quantum
        2 030325
[65]Fang K, Zhao J, Li X, Li Y and Duan R 2022       arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01226
[66]Bao J, Fu Z, Pramanik T, Mao J, Chi Y, Cao Y, Zhai C, Mao Y, Dai T, Chen X       et al. 2023 Nature
        Photonics  1–9