Echo-evolution data generation for quantum error
                   mitigation via neural networks

                                    Danila Babukhin1

 1Dukhov Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA), Moscow, 127055,
                                             Russia.


                 Contributing authors:dv.babukhin@gmail.com;


                                            Abstract
   Neural networks provide a prospective tool for error mitigation in quantum sim-
   ulation of physical systems. However, we need both noisy and noise-free data to
   train neural networks to mitigate errors in quantum computing results. Here, we
   propose a physics-motivated method to generate training data for quantum error
   mitigation via neural networks, which does not require classical simulation and
   target circuit simplification. In particular, we propose to use the echo evolution
   of  a  quantum  system to  collect  noisy and  noise-free  data for training  a  neural
   network. Under this method, the initial state evolves forward and backward in
   time, returning to the initial state at the end of evolution. When run on the noisy
   quantum processor, the resulting state will be influenced by with quantum noise
   accumulated during evolution. Having a vector of observable values of the initial
   (noise-free) state and the resulting (noisy) state allows us to compose training
   data for a neural network. We demonstrate that a feed-forward fully connected
   neural  network trained  on  echo-evolution-generated data  can  correct  results  of
   forward-in-time  evolution.  Our  findings  can  enhance  the  application  of  neural
   networks to error mitigation in quantum computing.

   Keywords: Quantum error mitigation, Neural networks, Quantum simulation, Ising
   model












                                                 1
1  Introduction

Development of quantum computers in recent years led to demonstrating genuinely
nontrivial results [1,2] on devices with up to hundreds of qubits and non-ideal compo-
nents [3]. Despite this, fault-tolerant quantum computing with error-correcting codes
is still beyond nowadays technological level. Until fault-tolerant quantum computing
unfolds, there is an alternative solution - to support NISQ devices with quantum error
mitigation (QEM)[4]. Quantum error mitigation is an approach to reduce the effect of
quantum noise in the results of quantum computing via additional data sampling and
post-processing. Up to date, several examples of QEM have been demonstrated [5–7]
and theoretical understanding of QEM has advanced [8] to make QEM a convenient
tool to support further development of quantum computing.
    A data-driven approach to quantum error mitigation [9–13] is a branch of QEM,
which  is  a  promising  enhancement  to  the  existing  QEM  toolbox.  The  data-driven
approach to QEM includes gathering noisy and noisy-free data and fitting (training)
an ansatz function to approximate a mapping between noisy and noisy-free data. The
trained ansatz function is then used to post-process data from a noisy quantum device.
To date, there are several works related to data-driven QEM. In [9], the idea to use
Clifford gates to generate classical data to provide ideal observables of a target circuit,
is proposed. The data is then used to train a linear ansatz function to error mitigation.
This method was demonstrated to be used with other QEM techniques to provide good
error mitigation performance [11] and provides high flexibility in terms of combining
with other error mitigation methods [14]. Another group of works demonstrates the
use of non-linear ansatz functions - neural networks - in quantum error mitigation.
There was demonstrated the capability to correct dynamics of many-body observables,
corrupted with quantum gate errors [12], and the capability to mitigate measurement
errors [13].
    Although the best machine learning approach to each case of QEM is unknown,
a definite advantage of machine learning is a possibility to move computational over-
head  from  quantum  computing  runtime  to  a  training  phase  of  a  machine  learning
algorithm [15]. During quantum computing runtime, we have to run a device several
times to construct a noiseless value estimator via non-machine-learning quantum error
mitigation method. In contrast, we can apply a machine learning estimator directly to
a single noisy value of a target quantum observable, thus running a quantum device
only once. But in that case, we need to train a machine learning algorithm quantum
error mitigation, and this is where additional computational overhead occurs. Even if
machine learning does not eliminate computational overhead, moving it from quan-
tum computing runtime allows speeding up useful computation of a NISQ device. As a
result, machine learning QEM may promote application of NISQ devices to real-world
problems.
    Training neural networks requires gathering data set, which consist of correspond-
ing  noisy  and  noise-free  observable  values.  For  a  problem  of  quantum  dynamics
simulation, our final target is a quantum state of the system at model time t. To have
noise-free observable data on such a state requires us to simulate the dynamics clas-
sically - a generally infeasible task for systems in the regime of quantum advantage
(> 50 qubits). Thus, there is a need for a workaround method to generate noise-free


                                                    2
data for quantum error mitigation. A possible solution to this problem was proposed
in [12]. There, lower-depth versions of quantum circuits are used to generate data out-
put of target (deep-depth) circuits. As the circuit in [12] is a Trotter decomposition of
the evolution operator, the depth of the circuit is controlled by a number of Trotter
steps. Although being a working solution, this approach bounds the opportunity to
simulate quantum dynamics for long times as a lower Trotter approximation leads to
lower quantum simulation accuracy.
    In this paper, we propose a physics-motivated method to generate data for quantum
error mitigation via neural networks, which does not require classical simulation and
target circuit simplification. In particular, we demonstrate that the echo evolution - an
evolution of a quantum system forward and backward in time - allows the production
of noisy and noise-free data required to train a neural network. We show that a neural
network trained on such data can mitigate the effect of quantum noise on the results
of  forward-in-time  evolution,  which  is  the  actual  target  of  quantum  simulation.  To
illustrate the proposed method, we simulate dynamics of a 2D spin system under the
transverse-field Ising Hamiltonian. We show that, for realistic gate noise, the neural
network,  trained  on  echo-evolution-generated  data,  mitigates  effect  of  gate  noise  in
forward-in-time dynamics results.
    This paper is organized as follows. We provide background on the transverse-field
Ising model in Sec.2. We formulate a method of data generation via echo-evolution in
Sec.3. We provide results on QEM via a feed-forward neural network, trained on data
from echo evolution of a 6-spin system, in Sec.5.1. We provide a case-study analysis of
the hidden layer width of our neural network in Sec.5.2and show that the quality of
error mitigation saturates for a number of neurons in the hidden layer, approximately
equal to the size of simulated system data vectors. We draw a conclusion in Sec.6

2  Dynamics of the transverse field Ising model

One of the main problems, which has an advantage of using quantum computing, is
the simulation of quantum system dynamics. As was initially proposed by Feynmann
[16] and Manin [17], quantum computing allows working with the whole basis of the
Hilbert space of the quantum system, which is exponential in the number of particles
in  the  system.  Among  others,  simulating  the  dynamics  of  quantum  spin  systems  is
one of the most important parts of quantum computing many-body physics [18]. The
main model of spin many-body physics is the transverse-field Ising model [19]. This
model allows investigating various many-body phenomena [18,20,21]. A hamiltonian
of the transverse field Ising model is


                                              NX            NX
                                  H =−h           σXi −J        σZi σZj                                        (1)
                                             i=1             ij

whereh> 0 is on-site energy of a single spin and J > 0 is interaction energy between
coupled spins, andσZi ,σXi   are Pauli matrices with eigenvalues±1. The quantum spin
system undergoes evolution under this hamiltonian from an initial state|ψ(0)⟩ at time


                                                    3
t = 0 to a final state|ψ(t)⟩ at arbitrary time t, and the two states are connected as

                                        |ψ(t)⟩ =e−iHt|ψ(0)⟩                                              (2)

wheree−iHt is an evolution operator. The dynamics of this spin system is straightfor-
ward to run on a quantum computer: every single spin maps on a single qubit, and
the evolution operator consists of single- and two-qubit gates available on the hard-
ware. A convenient way of constructing the evolution operator from quantum gates is
via Trotter decomposition. For a hamiltonian with two non-commuting parts HA and
HB  ([HA,HB]̸= 0) the Trotter decomposition for Ntr steps is

                                 eit(HA+HB)≈ (ei tNHAei tNHB)Ntr                                      (3)

with an error of the sizeO( t2Ntr ). There are Trotter decompositions of the higher order
[22], which provide lower decomposition error and allow simulating dynamics for longer
times.
    After evolving the initial state|ψ(0)⟩ to the final state|ψ(t)⟩, we usually measure
a  quantum  observable   ˆO,  which  corresponds  to  a  physical  quantity  in  the  modeled
system. For the N-qubit system, the observable can be of the following form

                                      ˆO =  ˆO1⊗  ˆO2⊗···⊗  ˆON                                           (4)

where Oj  is  a  single-qubit  observable.  In  quantum  computing,  we  usually  have
hardware-implemented access to measurements on a computational basis, which allows
measuring operators of the form

                             ˆOi =|i1⟩⟨i1|⊗|i2⟩⟨i2|⊗···⊗|iN⟩⟨iN|                                (5)

for i = 0, 1,..., 2N− 1 and binary representation i = i1i2...iN. Using computational
basis, we can measure qubit excitations via measurement

                                  ˆnj =I⊗...⊗|1j⟩⟨1j|⊗...⊗I                                       (6)

where we measure projection of the j-th qubit on|1⟩ and sum over all other qubits
outcomes. If we simulate a spin system using qubits, we can measure magnetization of
individual spins via measuring qubit excitationnj and then calculating magnetization
as mj = 2nj− 1. Finally, an average magnetization for a spin system is
                                                       X
                                            M =  1N        mj                                                   (7)
                                                        j
3  Data generation via echo evolution

To use neural networks for quantum error mitigation, we need to collect data with
noise-free observable values (Ydata). Generally, we want to use a quantum processor to


                                                     4
run problems that are beyond the reach of classical computing. Thus, for noisy data
from a NISQ device (Xdata), we usually cannot simulate noise-free data (Ydata).
    There are possible solutions throughout the literature. For quantum measurement
error  mitigation,  small  depth  circuits  with  single-qubit  rotations  allow  constructing
states  with  classically-predictable  counts  statistic  [13, 23].  For  the  QAOA  problem,
using Clifford-gate circuits demonstrated successful error mitigation for ground state
energy of a spin system [9]. Finally, using data from forward-in-time dynamics with
fewer deep circuits allowed mitigating errors in observable dynamics in deep circuits
in a problem of quantum simulation of spin system dynamics [12].
    This work concentrates on the last mentioned problem - simulation of quantum
dynamics. In [12], the data generation procedure produces training data using shallow-
depth circuits of the target system evolution. As a quasi-ideal data, a decomposition
of  the  evolution  operator  (3)  with  N1  Trotter  steps  is  used,  with N1  small  enough
to make the gate error effect negligible. Then, noisy data is generated by choosing a
target  number  of  Trotter  steps N2  and  adding  “delay”  circuits  to  make  quasi-ideal
circuits  of  depth N1  to  make  the  noise  effect  high  enough  for  the  depth  level N2.
This procedure generates a training data set of noisy observablesXdata and noise-free
observables Ydata to train a feed-forward neural network to mitigate the noise effect.
    The  main  drawback  of  the  described  method  is  a  restriction  on  the  quasi-ideal
circuits depth. A limited number of Trotter steps is allowed to make the data produced
with  quasi-ideal  circuits  approximately  noise-free.  This  limitation  restricts  the  user
to  generating  observable  data  only  for  small-time  dynamics  since  the  accuracy  of
simulated dynamics depends on the accuracy of Trotter decomposition (3): the fewer
Trotter steps are used, the less accurate is the resulting dynamics.
    We may find a solution from physical insights of quantum systems evolution. In
general, given an initial state|ψinit⟩, it is only possible to find the value of observable
O on the final state|ψfinal⟩ (after evolution) via running the system evolution

                                        |ψfinal⟩ =e−iHt|ψinit⟩                                             (8)

and then measuring an observable of interest

                                      O(t) =⟨ψfinal|  ˆO|ψfinal⟩.                                          (9)

However, there is a specific kind of evolution where knowing the initial state is enough
to know the answer after evolution - the echo evolution (Fig.1a). The echo evolution
is the following:
                               |ψfinal⟩ =eiH t2e−iH t2|ψinit⟩ =|ψinit⟩                               (10)
The resulting observable value is then

                     O(t) =⟨ψfinal|  ˆO|ψfinal⟩ =⟨ψinit|  ˆO|ψinit⟩ =O(0).                    (11)

The  relation  (11)  states  that  given  an  initial  quantum  state  |ψinit⟩,  the  observable
value after a unitary echo evolution is known beforehand. However, when we run the
echo  evolution  on  a  noisy  quantum  device,  the  observable  value  after  the  evolution
will be influenced by the overall quantum noise on a quantum device. In other words,


                                                      5
                                                    (a)













                                                   (b)

FIG. 1: The schematic description of the echo evolution and forward-in-
time evolution. a During echo evolution, a system evolves forward and backward
during overall time t. In case of no noise during evolution, the system will return to
the initial state. b During the forward-in-time evolution, the system evolves during
overall time t to some final state.


we know a desirable outcome from a quantum device and the error-corrupted outcome
from running the echo-evolution.
    The echo-type dynamics has many applications across physics. First examples are
photon (or spin) echo phenomena [24], where a sequence of   π2  and a π pulses allows
restoring coherence between atomic dipoles (or nuclear spins) and thus see an echo-
radiation pulse as a result of restored collective evolution. These two phenomena were
subjects of intense investigation in the second half of 20th century [25,26]. Next, the
investigations  on  echo-dynamics  in  many-body  systems  lead  to  introduction  of  the
Loschmidt echo [27]. This is an evolution of a quantum system back and forth, with
a perturbed hamiltonian, which allows investigating stability of system dynamics. It
is  initially  introduced  as  a  means  to  characterize  emergence  of  chaotic  behavior  in
quantum systems, and now this is an important theoretic tool in many fields of physics
[28,29]. There are several examples of the application the echo evolution in quantum
information  processing.  First,  the  Randomized  Benchmarking  protocol  [30–32]  -  a


                                                     6
FIG. 2: Data generation scheme. We prepare Ndata random initial states
|ψj⟩,j = 1,...,Ndata. We measure the observable  ˆO on each initial state to produce
noise-free data. Then, every initial state is prepared again and is subject to echo-
evolution under the transverse-field Ising hamiltonian (1). During the evolution, the
system is subject to quantum noise, which we depict with a red star in the middle
of each circuit line. After evolution, the system ends in a state ρj, on which we mea-
sure the observable  ˆO and obtain error-corrupted values.







standard tool for evaluating the quality of quantum gates - is also based on a kind of
echo evolution, when a sequence of random gates is applied to initial state and the
ideal outcome (when no gate errors occur) is the same initial state. Next, back and
forth evolution is a part of the recent algorithms for simulating quantum chemistry
[33, 34].  One  can  use  the  uncomputation  of  a  prepared  and  time-evolved  step  with
a variational ansatz to obtain a compressed circuit representation of the ansatz time
evolution and thus decrease the number of gates in the quantum chemical simulation,
thus reducing noise influence on the calculation results.
    In this work, we use echo-evolution for the purpose of quantum error mitigation.
The main goal of quantum error mitigation in the simulation of quantum dynamics
is to mitigate noise influence on observables from forward-in-time dynamics (Fig.1b).
The data generation method provided here uses the same evolution operator of the
quantum system, which produces the target (forward-in-time) evolution. If the depth
of circuits, which generate echo and forward-in-time evolutions, is the same, then these
evolutions are subject to the same level of noise. Thus, a neural network trained on an
echo-evolution-generated data set can likely correct the effect of noise on the forward-
in-time evolution outcome. As we demonstrate in the following section, this is indeed
the case.

                                                    7
4  Methods
4.1  Spin system evolution
To  demonstrate  the  idea,  we  simulate  the  evolution  of  a  6-spin  system  under  the
transverse-field Ising hamiltonian (1). We choose parameters  h = 1 and J =h/2 and
set  the  system  a  ladder  topology  (see  Fig.4a).  We  mapped  every  spin  to  a  single
qubit. We implemented the unitary evolution operator e−iHt (the operator in Fig.2)
with  noisy  single-  and  two-qubit  gates  via  Trotter  decomposition  (3)  with  HA  =
−hPNi=1σXi   and HB =−JPNijσZi σZj .
    For simulations, we chose a fixed number of Trotter steps such that the highest
time point of the forward-in-time evolution is Tfinal =π. To prepare the training set
via echo evolution, we use quantum circuits with the same number of Trotter steps
to preserve the circuit depth. Unlike forward evolution, during echo evolution half of
Trotter steps evolve the system backwards in time. Thus, during echo evolution the
system evolves at most to the time Techo = Tfinal2     = π2  and then back to t = 0.









4.2  Data generation
To  train  a  neural  network,  we  gather  data  from  random  initial  states  for  a  6-spin
system. These states are generated using a circuit in Fig.4b. Here,     θj  = arccos(x),
x∈ Uniform[−1, 1], ϕj ∈ Uniform[0, 2π],  and  “Random  CNOTs”  corresponds  to
random CNOT gates, applied to every pair of layout-connected qubits (see Fig.4a)
with  a  probability p  =  0.2.  For  every  time  point,  the  evolution  operator  consisted
of Ntr  Trotter  steps  forward  and Ntr  Trotter  steps  backward,  with Ntr  =  10,  and
the  coupling  map  corresponding  to  qubit  layout  (4a).  The  overall  gate  count  of  20
Trotter  steps  includes  280  CNOT  gates,  140 Rz  gates,  and  120 Rx  gates.  We  run
simulation  of  echo  evolution  for  2400  random  initial  states  with  5  time  points t∈
[0, π8, π4,  3π8 , π2 ]. Using several time points allows for the production of more data, as
every time point gives one data vector. For 5 time points, every random initial state
produces 5 data vectors, which differ by the mid-evolution state at timet. As a result,
we  obtain  data  from  evolution  with  different  times  and  amounts  of  entanglement
generated by hamiltonian (1), and thus with noisy outcome data for these different
entanglements. Data generation described above resulted in 12000 pairs of noisy and
noise-free observable vectors.
    We compose data vectors of single spin magnetizations and thus have data of the
dimension of the number of spins N. For each initial state, we produce a vector of
single spin magnetizations from measurements done before and after echo-evolution.


                                                     8
                                                                                                                              (a)








                                                                                                                              (b)

                                                                         FIG. 3: (a): A single Trotter step of evolution operator of the transverse field
                                                                         Ising hamiltonian. Gates are grouped to layers (colors) which can be simultaneously
                                                                         run on a quantum device (gates which do not have commonly used qubits). (b): a
                                                                         decomposition of RZZ  operator to CNOT gates and a single-qubit rotation.


                                                                         We obtain pairs of noisy and noise-free magnetization vectors of the form
                                                                                        m0noisy          2n0noisy− 1                     m0ideal         2n0ideal− 1
                                                                                        m1noisy2n1noisy− 1m1ideal2n1ideal− 1

                                                                                           m2noisy           2n2noisy− 1                        m2ideal          2n2ideal− 1
                                                                            ⃗mnoisy =      m3noisy     =     2n3noisy− 1       , ⃗mideal =      m3ideal     =    2n3ideal− 1       .(12)

                                                                                           m4noisy           2n4noisy− 1                        m4ideal          2n4ideal− 1
                                                                                           m5noisy           2n5noisy− 1                        m5ideal          2n5ideal− 1


                                                                         Here,niideal(ninoisy) is an excitation number ofi-th qubit, measured before (after) the
                                                                         echo-evolution. Correspondingly, miideal(minoisy) is a magnetization of the i-th spin,
                                                                         computed from excitation number niideal(ninoisy).


                                                                                                                                9









q0       RX
                    RZZ
q1       RX                      RZZ


q2     qiRX                           qi     RZZ
                RZZRZZ            =
q3     qjRX                           qj              RZ(Jijt)RZZ


q4       RX                                                           RZZ
                    RZZ
q5       RX
                                                                          (a) Every single qubit corre-
                                                                          sponds to a single spin. Every
                                                                          two connected qubits can be
                                                                          subject to a two-qubit gate,           (b) First layer of single qubit rotation is parametrized
                                                                          which allows the implementa-           with random angles θj  = arccos(x), x∈ Uniform[−1, 1]
                                                                          tion of interaction between two        and ϕj∈ Uniform[0, 2π]. CNOT gates are applied with
                                                                          spins.                                 probability p = 0.2 between every two connected qubits.

                                                                          FIG. 4: (a) A layout of a qubit system used in simulation in this work. (b) A quan-
                                                                          tum circuit implementing random initial states.


                                                                              To  test  the  performance  of  a  trained  neural  network,  we  generate  100  random
                                                                          states  and  subject  them  to  forward-in-time  evolution  from t  =  0  to t  = π.  During
                                                                          the evolution, the system is subject to the same noise structure and level and with
                                                                          Ntr = 20 Trotter steps to have the same circuit depth (see information about the total
                                                                          number of gates above).

                                                                          4.3  Error model
                                                                          In this work, we focused on the mitigation of gate errors. In the current state of quan-
                                                                          tum computing hardware, gate errors represent one of the main sources of errors [2] in
                                                                          large circuits, and most quantum error mitigation methods are first tested against this
                                                                          type of noise [4]. As a quantum noise model, we used single- and two-qubit depolarizing
                                                                          errors

                                                                                                               Φdepol1q    (ρ) = (1−q1)ρ + q12I,                                      (13)

                                                                                                           Φdepol2q    (ρ) = (1−q2)ρ + q24I⊗I                                      (14)


                                                                          with noise intensities q1  = 10−4  and q2  = 0.01 which correspond to state-of-the-art
                                                                          quantum computing capabilities [2]. We do not consider SPAM errors and decoherence
                                                                          in this work to provide a proof-of-principle illustration of the proposed idea.


                                                                                                                               10










|00⟩       U2(θ0,ϕ0)


|01⟩       U2(θ1,ϕ1)


|02⟩       U2(θ2,ϕ2)


|03⟩       U2(θ3,ϕ3)


|04⟩       U2(θ4,ϕ4)


|05⟩       U2(θ5,ϕ5)
4.4  Neural network structure, training and use
A  neural  network  we  use  here  is  a  multi-layer  perceptron  (see  Fig.5).  This  neural
network hasNinput = 6 neurons in the input layer, a single hidden layer withNhidden =
200 neurons, and the output layer with Noutput = 6 neurons. The activation function
of the hidden layer (denoted σ1 in SectionA) is ReLU

                                            σ1(x) =max(x, 0)                                              (15)

and the activation function of the output layer (denoted σ2 in SectionA) is Tanh


                                            σ2(x) = ex−e−xex +e−x                                               (16)

We use a mean square error (MSE) as a loss function


                                                   NdataX
                            R( ˆW,ˆb) =     1Ndata       (f(⃗xi,  ˆW,ˆb)−⃗yi)2                              (17)
                                                    i=1

and minimize it using an Adam optimizer [35] with parameters   lr = 3∗ 10−4, β1 =
0.9,β2 = 0.999. We used a batch size of 80 data vectors. We divide 12000 data vectors,
generated via echo evolution (Section4.2), to a training set of 8000 vectors, a validation
set of 2000 vectors, and a testing set of 2000 vectors. The validation set is used for
“early stopping” - saving parameters ( ˆW,ˆb) of the best-performing neural network,
and the testing set is used to check if the trained network can mitigate errors in unseen
echo-evolution-generated data (see SectionB).
    The  trained  neural  network  is  then  used  to  mitigate  errors  in  forward-in-time
generated data (see Section5.1for results). The final goal of quantum error mitigation
via a neural network is to train a neural network a mapping between noisy observable
data and noise-free observable data. A trained neural network thus will do a denoising
map
                                     ⃗mcorrected =f(⃗mnoisy,  ˆW,ˆb)                                      (18)
for every vector ⃗mnoisy which we gather from the simulation of a noisy quantum device.

4.5  Performance metric
To  illustrate  the  efficiency  of  error  mitigation,  we  introduce  a  correction  efficiency
value of the form
                                  K = 1−|⟨O⟩ideal−⟨O⟩corrected||⟨O⟩ideal−⟨O⟩noisy|                                      (19)

Here we denote observable values for noise-free (ideal) circuit run

                                         ⟨O⟩ideal =Tr[ ˆOρideal],                                           (20)

noisy circuit run
                                        ⟨O⟩noisy =Tr[ ˆOρnoisy],                                          (21)


                                                      11
  FIG. 5: A neural network architecture which we use in this work. It has input layer
  dimension 6, output layer dimension 6, and a hidden layer dimension with Nh = 200
  neurons. We use the ReLU activation function on a hidden layer output and the
  Tanh function on the output layer. Tanh function ensures correct spin magnetiza-
  tion values. mj  denote spin vector components before neural network processing and
  ¯mj  denote spin vector components after neural network processing.




  and noisy circuit run with error mitigation


                                    ⟨O⟩corrected =Tr[ ˆOρcorrected].                                     (22)


  This   metric   is   designed   to   characterize   effectiveness   of   error   mitigation.   If
  ⟨O⟩corrected =⟨O⟩ideal, then error mitigation method completely restored the effect of
  quantum noise, and K = 1. If⟨O⟩corrected =⟨O⟩noisy, then error mitigation method
  had no effect on the noisy observable value, and K = 0. Otherwise, when K < 0, the
  error mitigation method decreased the quality of observable value.


                                                      12





input layer                             hidden layer                             output layer
     =                                                                                 =
noisy input                                  h(1)                             denoised output
                                               1
     m1                                                                                ¯m1

                                             h(1)2
     m2                                                                                ¯m2

                                             h(1)3
     m3                                                                                ¯m3

                                             h(1)4
     m4                                                                                ¯m4

                                             h(1)5
     m5                                                                                ¯m5

                                             h(1)6
     m6                                        ...                                     ¯m6



                                             h(1)Nh
    In this work, we used average system magnetization as an observable of interest.
For average magnetization, the correction efficiency is

                                         K = 1− |∆Mafter||∆Mbefore|                                             (23)


where

                                    ∆Mbefore =Mideal−Mnoisy                                     (24)
                                ∆Mafter =Mideal−Mcorrected,                                     (25)

whereMideal,Mnoisy andMcorrected are defined as (7). This coefficient allows illustrat-
ing the effect of error mitigation via neural network, comparing resulting observables:
if ∆Mafter < ∆Mbefore, then the observable error reduced after neural network pro-
cessing; in opposite case, when ∆Mafter > ∆Mbefore, the observable error increased
after neural network processing.
5  Results
5.1  Quantum error mitigation in forward-in-time evolution
Here,  we  use  a  neural  network,  trained  on  an  echo  dynamical  data  set,  to  correct
forward-in-time evolution results under the transverse field Ising hamiltonian (1). The
test  data  set  consists  of  100  vectors  for  different  initial  states  (see  Appendix4for
simulation details). For every initial state, we simulated noisy dynamics for 20 time
points in the range [0,π] (in h units) and calculated the evolution of single spin mag-
netizations and average magnetization over the spin system. We provide an example
of the corrected evolution of magnetization with a trained neural network (for both
single spins and average magnetization) in Fig.6. To characterize correction efficiency
over different initial states of a spin system, we introduce a correction efficiency value
K. If K  = 1, the correction corresponds to a perfect correction, K  = 0 corresponds
to no correction, and K < 0 corresponds to a decrease of results quality after neural
network post-processing (see Section4.5for details). In Fig.7, we provide correction
efficiency valueK for forward dynamics of 100 initial random states. The provided K
values for every state are calculated for average values of magnetization of the spin
system and are further averaged over all 20 time points to produce a single value (i.e.,
average over 20 K values for each time point).
    We can see that a neural network trained on echo evolution can correct forward-
in-time  evolution  results.  Thus,  a  neural  network  trained  to  mitigate  the  quantum
noise effect on echo evolution can mitigate the quantum noise effect in forward-in-time
evolution. The quality of correction for average magnetization dynamics is predictably
better than for single spin magnetization (see K  values for average (left) and single
spin (right) dynamics in Fig.6). From Fig.7, we see that most of the states from a
100-state sample have a positive correction efficiency value K.
    Finally,  in  Fig.8,  we  provide  examples  of  single  spin  magnetization  dynamics
before and after neural network correction. We again see that a neural network can


                                                    13
mitigate the effect of quantum gate noise on the quality of observable dynamics of the
forward-in-time evolution.
    An interesting point is that the proportion of data with positive error mitigation
(K > 0) is approximately 88%. The same proportion of corrected states is observed,
if we correct echo evolution instead of forward evolution. In particular, if we gener-
ate data vectors (vectors of spins magnetization) and divide the whole data set into
a  training  part  and  a  test  part,  applying  a  trained  neural  network  to  a  test  part  -
which was not used in the training process - will give a positive correction efficiency
proportion similar to what we observe in the case of correcting forward-in-time evo-
lution. More analysis on the correction efficiency proportion in case of echo evolution
test  data  is  provided  in  AppendixB.  This  proportion  can  be  improved  with  doing
more shots for every quantum circuit. It is unclear how this proportion depends on
the noise level of quantum gates. Experiments with another level of noise (done by
authors during this work) do not allow corroboration of any hypothesis.
























FIG. 6: Left: forward-in-time evolution of average chain magnetization of a ran-
dom initial state with noise-free evolution (blue), noisy evolution (red), corrected
with neural network (green), and exact evolution (black). We simulate noise-free
evolution, noisy evolution, and neural-network-corrected evolution via Trotterization
of a hamiltonian evolution with the same number of Trotter steps (Ntr  = 20), and
simulate “exact” dynamics with 10Ntr Trotter steps. Right: Forward-in-time evo-
lution of magnetization of individual spins for the initial state, described on the left
plot.






                                                    14
FIG. 7: Values of correction efficiency K for forward-in-time evolution of 100 ran-
dom initial states. States are sorted with respect to the correction efficiency value
K. Every K value is calculated for average magnetization values of magnetization
of the spin system, with further averaging over 20 time points to produce a single
value (i.e., average over 20 K values for each time point).


5.2  Analysis of the neural network size
In this section, we demonstrate that, for the dynamics we here consider, the number
of neurons in the hidden layer can be equal to approximately the size of data vectors.
For  that  purpose,  we  train  ensembles  of  neural  networks  with  different  widths  of
their  hidden  layers  on  different  subsets  of  echo-evolution-generated  data.  Then,  we
calculate  correction  efficiency  (23)  and  statistics  of  changes  in  magnetization  data
vectors before and after postprocessing with a trained neural network (24). We keep
all other hyperparameters fixed (see AppendixDfor details).
    In Fig.9, we provide dependence of the correction efficiency value (23) on the width
of  the  hidden  layer  for  different  levels  of  quantum  noise  (values  of  two-qubit  gates
errorq2). Each value is calculated for average magnetization values, and the statistics
in calculated over 50 different neural networks for each width of the hidden layer and
for  1000  initial  states  in  each  training  set  (different  for  every  of  15  neural  network
hidden layer width values.) From Fig.9, we see that the correction efficiency (23) for
noisy data stops increasing after approximately 8-neurons width of the hidden layer
- even for 200 neurons in the hidden layer, we have almost the same performance of
error mitigation as we have with an 8-neuron layer. We provide additional details on
statistics of average magnetization differences in AppendixD.
    This  result  is  surprising  since  making  neural  networks  larger  generally  leads  to
better results. We see that a relatively small width of the hidden layer was enough to
saturate the neural network quantum error mitigation performance. Here, we investi-
gated a single setup - the dynamics of a spin system with a fixed size, implemented
with  only  a  particular  kind  of  single-  and  two-qubit  gate  noise  (depolarizing).  It  is


                                                     15
FIG. 8: Forward-in-time evolution of individual spin magnetizations for 4 random
initial states.


interesting to investigate other types of quantum noise and more systems with different
quantum observables.

6  Conclusion

We introduced a physics-motivated method to generate data for training neural net-
works for quantum error mitigation. This method uses the echo evolution of a quantum
system to generate noisy and noise-free data vectors. This method does not require
classical simulation and simplification of target evolution circuit and thus is practically
applicable to problems of the quantum advantage size(≥ 50 qubits). We demonstrated
that  a  neural  network  trained  on  echo-evolution-generated  data  mitigates  effect  of
quantum noise on results of the forward-in-time evolution. For illustration, we used a
system of 6 spins, evolving under the transverse-field Ising Hamiltonian, whose evolu-
tion we implemented via noisy quantum gates. As a side result, we observed that the


                                                   16
FIG. 9: Values of correction efficiency (23) for neural networks with different
widths of the hidden layer. Each value is calculated for average magnetization val-
ues, and the statistics in calculated over 50 different neural networks for each width
of the hidden layer and for 1000 initial states in each training set (different for every
of 15 neural network hidden layer width values.) Results provided for data with dif-
ferent levels of noise (indicated with different values of two-qubit gate noise q2).



width of one hidden layer of our network only requires about ten neurons to saturate
neural network performance in quantum error mitigation.
    There are several ways to improve the proposed method. The method uses ran-
dom initial states to generate data set with echo evolution. In this form, the method
intrinsically uses the fact that the depth of circuits used to prepare initial states is
much more shallow than evolution-generating circuits. Although it is practically rea-
sonable, it goes with a certain amount of noise, which affects the noise-free part of the
data. The first possible solution is reducing the noise by limiting the initial states to
states generated with depth-restricted circuits. For example, we can use only one layer
of single-qubit rotations to generate initial states. As provided in [13,36], one layer
of single-qubit rotations allows the generation of almost noise-free states with exactly
known  form and,  thus,  with known observable values. The  second  possible solution
is to use Clifford gates to prepare initial states, restricting the state-preparing circuit
depth  to  shallow  (i.e.,  much  less  depth  that  the  evolution  circuit).  In  that  case  we
still have access to the ideal observable value and prepare initial states with negligible
error with respect to the forward evolution (which is non-Clifford).
    The  method  we  provide  here  can  stimulate  applications  of  neural  networks  for
quantum error mitigation. Data-driven QEM provides a prospective tool to enhance
the capabilities of NISQ devices. In general, all data-driven methods learn a mapping
between noisy and noise-free observable data. Recent results provide reasoning that, for
large quantum circuits, this mapping could be of almost rescaling form [37,38], as the
cumulative quantum noise acts almost as white noise [39]. So, in essence, data-driven
methods provide a clever way of learning how to rescale (with a slight nonlinearity)
observable values affected by quantum noise.


                                                     17
    We have already seen that neural networks can mitigate quantum evolution noise
[12]  and  quantum  measurement  noise  [13, 36].  At  the  same  time,  mitigating  coher-
ent errors (e.g., gate angle over-rotation, phase calibration errors, crosstalk-induced
evolution) with machine learning is still a scarcely explored field. Recent works demon-
strated that coherent errors severely reduce mitigation efficiency of machine learning
methods [15,40]. A possible solution for that problem was proposed to reduce the effect
of phase calibration errors and gate angle over-rotation [41–43]. In this work, coherent
errors are mitigated via alternately applying direct and “inverse” sequences of control
pulses, which implement the same quantum gate (conditions when it is possible are
also provided). While this method reduces phase calibration and over-rotation errors,
a crosstalk-induced evolution cannot be mitigated this way as crosstalk error depends
on qubit excitation and circuit depth rather than on parameters of gate pulses. Pos-
sible ways to do quantum error mitigation in the presence of crosstalk error is to use
randomized compiling [44,45] or apply dynamical decoupling sequences [46,47]. As
the effect of crosstalk-induced dynamics depends circuit depth, it would be interest-
ing to incorporate circuit depth as an additional dimension in data vectors. Whether
it allows to mitigate crosstalk-induced errors is a subject of future research.
    As  neural  networks  enter  the  field  of  quantum  error  mitigation,  an  important
question is to compare neural networks to other methods [4]. In particular, the scaling
of  neural  network  size  and  efficiency  concerning  various  experiment  variables  (e.g.,
data dimension, training sample size, noise level, or neural network width/depth) is
unknown.  Other  QEM  techniques  (e.g.,  Zero  Noise  Extrapolation  and  Probabilistic
Error Cancellation [5], Virtual Distillation [7]) have known efficiency under a general
framework [8]. As we demonstrated, a neural network with a single hidden layer can
saturate its quality with a small hidden layer width. It is possible that the number
of neurons needed to mitigate quantum noise effect depends on the complexity of the
system dynamics. The spin dynamics considered in this work required a number of
neurons, which is equal to approximately the size of the system. Further experiments
with  systems  of  different  sizes  and  types  of  quantum  noise  and  theoretical  scaling
analysis are interesting subjects for future research.

Acknowledgements.    The  author  would  like  to  thank  W.V.  Pogosov  for  careful
reading  the  manuscript  and  providing  feedback.  Simulation  were  made  using  qiskit
library [48]. Illustrations for quantum circuits were made using quantikz library [49].

Data availability statement.    All code and data, supporting this manuscript, are
available in github repository [50].

Note added.    After the completion of this manuscript, a work about generation data
for  neural  network  quantum  error  mitigation  appeared  [51],  where  authors  propose
a  framework  of  fiducial  processes,  which  also  explores  generation  noisy  and  noise-
free  data  without  classical  simulation  of  the  target  quantum  computation  process.
The echo-evolution data generation can be considered an example of this framework
application, inspired by process known in dynamics of physical systems. Although we
here concentrated on dynamics of spin systems, echo-evolution can be applied to all
processes, based on hamiltonian simulation.


                                                     18
Declarations

Conflicts of interest.    Author declares no conflict of interest.

Appendix A    Supervised learning of feed-forward
                             fully-connected neural networks

In essence, neural networks are composite nonlinear functions which can approximate
a data-underlying function. Recently, neural networks were used as an effective instru-
ment for solving problems in physics [52]. Eventually, the use of neural networks spread
to  quantum  informatics  [53–55]  and  to  quantum  error  mitigation  [2, 12, 23, 36].  It
is a reasonable advancement of applications since the error mitigation aims to post-
process data from a noisy quantum device with an approximately inverse noise map,
which can be a function that the neural network approximates. Here, we provide some
notions of neural network machinery we will need in the following.
    The most straightforward approach to training neural networks is supervised learn-
ing. To formulate this approach, we need to recall a notion of the data set. Suppose we
have vectors⃗x and corresponding “labels” y. A set of these pairs{⃗xi, yi}|Ndatai=1    belongs
to a population of all vectors ⃗x and y and have an underlying functional dependency
F(⃗x) = y. The set{⃗xi, yi}|Ndatai=1     is called a data set. Depending on structure of y,
the  data  set  can  induce  a  classification  problem  (y∈  [1, 2,...]),  regression  problem
(y∈ R), or be another kind of mapping problem (y =⃗y).
    The aim of supervised learning is to train a parameterized function f(⃗x,  ˆW ) - for
example, a neural network - to approximate the functionF  on the whole domain of
values, using only available data set{⃗xi, yi}|Ndatai=1   . Such a neural network must have
many parameters and enough non-linearity to be expressive to learn a data function
F  from  provided  data.  The  most  simple  architecture  of  a  neural  network  is  a  fully
connected neural network. Every layer of such a network does a nonlinear map of the
form                        NinX

                 xjout =σ         Wjixiin +bj      , ⃗xout = (x1out,x2out,...,xNoutout  ).              (A1)
                              i=1
Here, Wji  and bj  are  neural  network  parameters  to  be  trained,  and σ(.)  is  a  non-
linear function, xiin and xjout are vector components of input and output vectors, Nin
and Nout - number of elements in xin and xout. Several such layers compose a neural
network. For example, a neural network with an input layer, a single hidden layer, and
an output layer has the following form:

                                      N2X               N1X
                 f(⃗x,  ˆW,ˆb) =σ2          Wj2j1σ1           Wj1ixiin +bj1      +bj2   .               (A2)
                                       j2=1             j2=1

Here we denoted all trainable weights on different layers as  ˆW  and all trainable biases
as ˆb,σ1(2) - non-linear functions, applied after hidden (output) layer correspondingly.
For our purposes, the understanding of neural networks as functions of the form (A2),


                                                    19
which takes vectors ⃗xin as inputs and returns vectors ⃗xout =f(⃗xin,  ˆW,ˆb) as outputs,
is sufficient.
    Having data set{⃗xi, yi}|Ndatai=1    and a neural networkf(⃗x,  ˆW,ˆb), the goal is to train a
neural network to approximate functional dependence of data set such that the network
can realize this dependence on unseen data vectors ⃗x. The training usually requires
two ingredients - choosing a loss function and a training optimization procedure. The
loss function L(f(⃗x,  ˆW,ˆb),y) measures the error between the network output and a
correct value of y. Calculating loss values over the data set, we construct an empirical
risk

                                                    NX
                             R( ˆW,ˆb) =     1Ndata     L(f(⃗xi,  ˆW,ˆb),⃗yi)                              (A3)
                                                   i=1

which  we  minimize  over  iterations  of  training.  The  training  process  is  a  gradient
descent towards the minimum of empirical risk (A3), with the use of back-propagation
of error through weights in different layers [56]. Usually, the training process continues
until a satisfactory local minimum of the function (A3) is reached and a set of neural
network parameters is known

                                     ( ˆW∗,ˆb∗) =arg minW,b R( ˆW,ˆb)                                      (A4)

Appendix B    Quantum error mitigation in echo
                              evolution data

We  train  a  neural  network  on  echo-evolution-generated  data  and  check  its  capabil-
ity to correct data of the same kind, i.e., generated with echo evolution. We use the
experiment setup described in Appendix4. In Fig.B1, we provide statistics of aver-
age magnetization error for 2000 test vectors. In particular, in the test data set, we
have  2000  pairs  of  noisy  and  noise-free  vectors  of  spin  magnetizations  of  the  form
(⃗mnoisy,⃗mideal) (see12). From noise vectors we obtain, after applying a trained neural
network for data vectors ⃗mnoisy, 2000 corrected vectors ⃗mcorrected. Then we calculate
the differences between the average magnetization of the spin system, calculated from
noise-free and noisy vectors, and noise-free and corrected vectors:
                                                  X
                   ∆Mnoisy(corrected) =  1N           (mjideal−mjnoisy(corrected)),                 (B5)
                                                    j

where the second vector is a noisy (neural network corrected) vector of spin magnetiza-
tion. Values of ∆M are provided in Fig.B1(left plot), and absolute values of ∆     M for
every one of 2000 test states are provided in Fig.B1(right plot). We see that applying
a neural network leads to decreased error dispersion (left histogram) and decreased
absolute error value (right scatter plot). We provide correction efficiency valuesK (see
(23)) for every test data vector alongside with ideal, noisy, and corrected average mag-
netization of the spin system in Fig.B2(we provide noise-free/noisy and corrected


                                                     20
FIG. B1: Left: a histogram of ∆M  distribution of echo evolution results before
and after error mitigation with a trained neural network. Right: a scatter plot of
∆M  for 2000 final states after echo evolution before and after error mitigation with
a trained neural network. Solid lines denote average absolute values of ∆M  over the
test vectors dataset.


magnetization values on two separate figures for better visibility without overlapping).
Here, magnetization values are sorted with respect to correction efficiency value K,
thus there is an ascending character ofK value with state number in Fig.B2. We can
see that the neural network compensates for the shrinkage of average magnetization
for most of the states in the test sample: approximately 88% of states have a positive
correction efficiency valueK, which means that, after applying the neural network, the
difference  between  corrected  and  ideal  magnetization  values  decreased  with  respect
to the difference between uncorrected and noise-free values. We note that states that
are hard to correct with a neural network (negative values of K) have average mag-
netization close to zero. As depolarizing gate error leads to a decrease in the average
magnetization  absolute  value  (it  tends  to  zero),  if  the  ideal  state  has  close  to  zero
average system magnetization, its noise-corrupted magnetization is indistinguishable
from the noise-free case.

Appendix C    Performance under different noise
                             levels

Here we provide additional data on neural network quantum error mitigation under
different levels of gate error noise. We executed quantum error mitigation with a neural
networks,  trained  on  echo-evolution  generated  data  for  several  levels  of  gate  noise
for 100 forward-in-time evolution of random initial states. We calculated correction
efficiency values K  for every evolution as well as percentage of positive K  values in
each initial states sample.
    We  provide  plots  for  calculation  results  in  Fig.C3.  We  see  that  performance  of
correction decreases with growing power of gate noise. For noise level (per gate) below
1% we see that correction efficiency values decreased down to 50% of positive correction
efficiency values in a sample. Although we provide here only a single sample of initial
states forward-in-time evolution for each noise level, we can conclude that with more
noise training a neural network to quantum error mitigation will require more efforts.


                                                    21
FIG. B2: Left: magnetization values (averaged over the spin chain) for 2000 final
states after echo evolution with noisy evolution operator (orange) and after error
mitigation with a trained neural network (blue). Values are sorted with respect
to the correction efficiency parameter K (black curve). Right: magnetization val-
ues (averaged over the spin chain) for 2000 final states after echo evolution with
exact evolution operator. Values are sorted with respect to the correction efficiency
parameter K.


Increasing size of the training data set can possibly be a requirement to increase error
mitigation efficiency of a neural network.

Appendix D    Analysis of the neural network size,
                             continued

In  the  main  text,  we  trained  a  neural  network  with  a  single  hidden  layer  on  data
obtained  from  the  echo  evolution  of  the  spin  system.  Then  we  demonstrated  quan-
tum error mitigation in data obtained from the forward-in-time dynamics of the spin
system. For that experiment, we chose a particular size of the hidden layer (200 neu-
rons). In this section, we provide analysis illustrating that the number of neurons in
the hidden layer, in the case of dynamics simulation considered here, can be lowered
to approximately the size of data vectors. In the following, we provide simulations for
neural networks with variable width of the hidden layer and with other parts of the
setup fixed - e.g., for the number of hidden layers, activation functions, loss function,
and training procedure details (type of optimizer, size of data batches, etc.).
    To analyze this question, we evaluate the quality of error mitigation depending on
hidden layer width. In particular, we use a trained neural network to mitigate quantum
noise error in the test data set - a hold-out part of echo evolution data to evaluate error
mitigation performance. For a test set of a fixed size, we can calculate statistics on
error-mitigated observable values and thus see how good our trained network performs
error mitigation.
    We generated via echo evolution data sets (12000 pairs of noise and noise-free mag-
netization vectors) for different levels of two-qubit gate noise (q2 = 0.003, 0.007, 0.01).
For every noise level, we did the following steps. First, we generated 50 random sub-
sets of training data (6000 pairs of noise and noise-free magnetization vectors) and
divided each subset into a training data set (4000 vector pairs), validation data set


                                                   22
(1000 vector pairs), and test data set (1000 vector pairs). Second, we chose a width of
the hidden layer Nhidden∈ [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 25, 50, 100, 200] and generated
50 neural network models with the same initialization of weights. Third, we trained
these neural network “clones” on the 50 different data sets, each for 100 epochs. Dur-
ing the training, we used a batch size of 80, the Adam optimizer with learning rate
lr = 3∗ 10−4, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999). We used mean square error (17) as a loss func-
tion. Finally, we calculated average correction efficiency values and several statistics
of|∆M| - difference of average magnetization of spin system before and after applying
a trained neural network (see24). The average was calculated over the 50 different
realizations of neural networks with fixed hidden layer width. Similarly, correction effi-
ciency values were calculated for the 50 different test sets with 1000 vector pairs, and
an average of over these 1000 vectors generated a single value for each test data set.
    In the main text in Fig.9, we provided dependence of the correction efficiency (23)
on the width of the hidden layer for different levels of quantum noise (indicated with
different values of two-qubit gates error q2). Here, in Fig.D4, we provide dependence
of average magnetization difference (B5) on the hidden layer width. From Fig.D4we
can see (similar to Fig.9) that the performance of quantum error mitigation becomes
saturated with the hidden layer width of approximately 8 neurons. This pattern also
occurs for different levels of quantum noise.

References

 [1]Arute, F., Arya, K., Babbush, R., Bacon, D., Bardin, J.C., Barends, R., Biswas,
      R.,  Boixo,  S.,  Brandao,  F.G.S.L.,  Buell,  D.A.,  Burkett,  B.,  Chen,  Y.,  Chen,
      Z.,  Chiaro,  B.,  Collins,  R.,  Courtney,  W.,  Dunsworth,  A.,  Farhi,  E.,  Foxen,
      B.,  Fowler,  A.,  Gidney,  C.,  Giustina,  M.,  Graff,  R.,  Guerin,  K.,  Habegger,  S.,
      Harrigan,  M.P.,  Hartmann,  M.J.,  Ho,  A.,  Hoffmann,  M.,  Huang,  T.,  Humble,
      T.S.,  Isakov,  S.V.,  Jeffrey,  E.,  Jiang,  Z.,  Kafri,  D.,  Kechedzhi,  K.,  Kelly,  J.,
      Klimov, P.V., Knysh, S., Korotkov, A., Kostritsa, F., Landhuis, D., Lindmark,
      M., Lucero, E., Lyakh, D., Mandr`a, S., McClean, J.R., McEwen, M., Megrant,
      A.,  Mi,  X.,  Michielsen,  K.,  Mohseni,  M.,  Mutus,  J.,  Naaman,  O.,  Neeley,  M.,
      Neill,  C.,  Niu,  M.Y.,  Ostby,  E.,  Petukhov,  A.,  Platt,  J.C.,  Quintana,  C.,  Rief-
      fel, E.G., Roushan, P., Rubin, N.C., Sank, D., Satzinger, K.J., Smelyanskiy, V.,
      Sung,  K.J.,  Trevithick,  M.D.,  Vainsencher,  A.,  Villalonga,  B.,  White,  T.,  Yao,
      Z.J., Yeh, P., Zalcman, A., Neven, H., Martinis, J.M.: Quantum supremacy using
      a programmable superconducting processor. Nature 574(7779), 505–510 (2019)
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5

 [2]Kim,  Y.,  Eddins,  A.,  Anand,  S.,  Wei,  K.X.,  Berg,  E.,  Rosenblatt,  S.,  Nayfeh,
      H.,  Wu,  Y.,  Zaletel,  M.,  Temme,  K.,  Kandala,  A.:  Evidence  for  the  utility  of
      quantum  computing  before  fault  tolerance.  Nature 618(7965),  500–505  (2023)
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06096-3

 [3]Preskill,  J.:  Quantum  computing  in  the  nisq  era  and  beyond.  Quantum     2,  79
      (2018)https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79


                                                     23
 [4]Cai, Z., Babbush, R., Benjamin, S.C., Endo, S., Huggins, W.J., Li, Y., McClean,
     J.R., O’Brien, T.E.: Quantum error mitigation (2023)arXiv:2210.00921[quant-
     ph]

 [5]Temme, K., Bravyi, S., Gambetta, J.M.: Error mitigation for short-depth quan-
     tum  circuits.  Physical  Review  Letters 119(18)  (2017)https://doi.org/10.1103/
     physrevlett.119.180509

 [6]Cai, Z.: Quantum error mitigation using symmetry expansion. Quantum     5, 548
     (2021)https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2021-09-21-548

 [7]Huggins, W.J., McArdle, S., O’Brien, T.E., Lee, J., Rubin, N.C., Boixo, S., Wha-
     ley,  K.B.,  Babbush,  R.,  McClean,  J.R.:  Virtual  distillation  for  quantum  error
     mitigation.  Physical  Review  X 11(4)  (2021)https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevx.
     11.041036

 [8]Cai,   Z.:   A   practical   framework   for   quantum   error   mitigation   (2023)
     arXiv:2110.05389[quant-ph]

 [9]Czarnik,  P.,  Arrasmith,  A.,  Coles,  P.J.,  Cincio,  L.:  Error  mitigation  with  clif-
     ford  quantum-circuit  data.  Quantum  5,  592  (2021)https://doi.org/10.22331/
     q-2021-11-26-592

[10]Czarnik, P., McKerns, M., Sornborger, A.T., Cincio, L.: Improving the efficiency
     of learning-based error mitigation (2022)arXiv:2204.07109[quant-ph]

[11]Lowe, A., Gordon, M.H., Czarnik, P., Arrasmith, A., Coles, P.J., Cincio, L.: Uni-
     fied approach to data-driven quantum error mitigation. Physical Review Research
     3(3) (2021)https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevresearch.3.033098

[12]Zhukov,  A.,  Pogosov,  W.:  Quantum  error  reduction  with  deep  neural  network
     applied  at  the  post-processing  stage.  Quantum  Information  Processing  21(3)
     (2022)https://doi.org/10.1007/s11128-022-03433-9

[13]Lee, C., Park, D.K.: Scalable quantum measurement error mitigation via condi-
     tional independence and transfer learning (2023)arXiv:2308.00320[quant-ph]

[14]Bultrini,  D.,  Gordon,  M.H.,  Czarnik,  P.,  Arrasmith,  A.,  Cerezo,  M.,  Coles,
     P.J.,  Cincio,  L.:  Unifying  and  benchmarking  state-of-the-art  quantum  error
     mitigation   techniques.   Quantum   7,   1034   (2023)https://doi.org/10.22331/
     q-2023-06-06-1034

[15]Liao,  H.,  Wang,  D.S.,  Sitdikov,  I.,  Salcedo,  C.,  Seif,  A.,  Minev,  Z.K.:  Machine
     Learning for Practical Quantum Error Mitigation (2023).https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2309.17368

[16]Feynmann, R.: Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys.      21, 467



                                                    24
     (1982)

[17]Manin, Y.: Computable and noncomputable. Russian: Sov. Radio      128, 8 (1980)

[18]Smith, A., Kim, M.S., Pollmann, F., Knolle, J.: Simulating quantum many-body
     dynamics on a current digital quantum computer. npj Quantum Information 5(1)
     (2019)https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-019-0217-0

[19]Mbeng,  G.B.,  Russomanno,  A.,  Santoro,  G.E.:  The  quantum  ising  chain  for
     beginners (2020)arXiv:2009.09208[quant-ph]

[20]Mi,  X.,  Ippoliti,  M.,  Quintana,  C.,  Greene,  A.,  Chen,  Z.,  Gross,  J.,  Arute,  F.,
     Arya, K., Atalaya, J., Babbush, R., Bardin, J.C., Basso, J., Bengtsson, A., Bilmes,
     A., Bourassa, A., Brill, L., Broughton, M., Buckley, B.B., Buell, D.A., Burkett,
     B., Bushnell, N., Chiaro, B., Collins, R., Courtney, W., Debroy, D., Demura, S.,
     Derk,  A.R.,  Dunsworth,  A.,  Eppens,  D.,  Erickson,  C.,  Farhi,  E.,  Fowler,  A.G.,
     Foxen, B., Gidney, C., Giustina, M., Harrigan, M.P., Harrington, S.D., Hilton, J.,
     Ho, A., Hong, S., Huang, T., Huff, A., Huggins, W.J., Ioffe, L.B., Isakov, S.V., Ive-
     land, J., Jeffrey, E., Jiang, Z., Jones, C., Kafri, D., Khattar, T., Kim, S., Kitaev,
     A., Klimov, P.V., Korotkov, A.N., Kostritsa, F., Landhuis, D., Laptev, P., Lee,
     J., Lee, K., Locharla, A., Lucero, E., Martin, O., McClean, J.R., McCourt, T.,
     McEwen, M., Miao, K.C., Mohseni, M., Montazeri, S., Mruczkiewicz, W., Naa-
     man, O., Neeley, M., Neill, C., Newman, M., Niu, M.Y., O’Brien, T.E., Opremcak,
     A.,  Ostby,  E.,  Pato,  B.,  Petukhov,  A.,  Rubin,  N.C.,  Sank,  D.,  Satzinger,  K.J.,
     Shvarts, V., Su, Y., Strain, D., Szalay, M., Trevithick, M.D., Villalonga, B., White,
     T., Yao, Z.J., Yeh, P., Yoo, J., Zalcman, A., Neven, H., Boixo, S., Smelyanskiy, V.,
     Megrant, A., Kelly, J., Chen, Y., Sondhi, S.L., Moessner, R., Kechedzhi, K., Khe-
     mani, V., Roushan, P.: Time-crystalline eigenstate order on a quantum processor.
     Nature 601(7894), 531–536 (2021)https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04257-w

[21]Chen, I.-C., Burdick, B., Yao, Y., Orth, P.P., Iadecola, T.: Error-mitigated simula-
     tion of quantum many-body scars on quantum computers with pulse-level control.
     Physical Review Research 4(4) (2022)https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevresearch.
     4.043027

[22]Hatano, N., Suzuki, M.: In: Das, A., K. Chakrabarti, B. (eds.) Finding Exponen-
     tial Product Formulas of Higher Orders, pp. 37–68. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
     (2005).https://doi.org/10.1007/11526216               2

[23]Kim, C., Park, K.D., Rhee, J.-K.: Quantum error mitigation with artificial neural
     network. IEEE Access 8, 188853–188860 (2020)https://doi.org/10.1109/access.
     2020.3031607

[24]Allen,   L.,   Eberly,   J.H.:   Optical   Resonance   and   Two-level   Atoms.   Bal-
     lard  CREOL  collection.  Wiley,  ???  (1975).https://books.google.ru/books?id=
      KEXAAAAIAAJ



                                                    25
[25]Hahn, E.L.: Spin echoes. Phys. Rev.      80, 580–594 (1950)https://doi.org/10.1103/
     PhysRev.80.580

[26]Abella,  I.D.,  Kurnit,  N.A.,  Hartmann,  S.R.:  Photon  echoes.  Phys.  Rev.       141,
     391–406 (1966)https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.141.391

[27]Peres, A.: Stability of quantum motion in chaotic and regular systems. Phys. Rev.
     A 30, 1610–1615 (1984)https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.30.1610

[28]Wisniacki, A.: Loschmidt echo. Scholarpedia      7(8), 11687 (2012)https://doi.org/
     10.4249/scholarpedia.11687

[29]Serbyn,  M.,  Abanin,  D.A.:  Loschmidt  echo  in  many-body  localized  phases.
     Physical Review B 96(1) (2017)https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevb.96.014202

[30]Emerson, J., Alicki, R.,        ˙Zyczkowski, K.: Scalable noise estimation with random
     unitary operators. Journal of Optics B: Quantum and Semiclassical Optics 7(10),
     347–352 (2005)https://doi.org/10.1088/1464-4266/7/10/021

[31]Knill,  E.,  Leibfried,  D.,  Reichle,  R.,  Britton,  J.,  Blakestad,  R.B.,  Jost,  J.D.,
     Langer,  C.,  Ozeri,  R.,  Seidelin,  S.,  Wineland,  D.J.:  Randomized  benchmark-
     ing of quantum gates. Physical Review A 77(1) (2008)https://doi.org/10.1103/
     physreva.77.012307

[32]Magesan,  E.,  Gambetta,  J.M.,  Emerson,  J.:  Scalable  and  robust  randomized
     benchmarking  of  quantum  processes.  Physical  Review  Letters  106(18)  (2011)
     https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.106.180504

[33]Barison, S., Vicentini, F., Carleo, G.: An efficient quantum algorithm for the time
     evolution of parameterized circuits. Quantum 5, 512 (2021)https://doi.org/10.
     22331/q-2021-07-28-512

[34]Bultrini,  D.,  Vendrell,  O.:  Mixed  Quantum-Classical  Dynamics  for  Near  Term
     Quantum Computers (2023).https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11375

[35]Kingma,  D.P.,  Ba,  J.:  Adam:  A  method  for  stochastic  optimization  (2017)
     arXiv:1412.6980[cs.LG]

[36]Kim,  J.,  Oh,  B.,  Chong,  Y.,  Hwang,  E.,  Park,  D.K.:  Quantum  readout  error
     mitigation via deep learning. New Journal of Physics 24(7), 073009 (2022)https:
     //doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/ac7b3d

[37]Babukhin, D.V., Pogosov, W.V.: The effect of quantum noise on algorithmic per-
     fect quantum state transfer on NISQ processors. Quantum Information Processing
     21(1) (2021)https://doi.org/10.1007/s11128-021-03346-z

[38]Tsubouchi, K., Sagawa, T., Yoshioka, N.: Universal cost bound of quantum error



                                                    26
     mitigation based on quantum estimation theory (2023)arXiv:2208.09385[quant-
     ph]

[39]Dalzell, A.M., Hunter-Jones, N., Brand˜ao, F.G.S.L.: Random quantum circuits
     transform local noise into global white noise (2021)arXiv:2111.14907[quant-ph]

[40]Zhukov,  A.,  Pogosov,  W.:  Quantum  error  mitigation  in  the  regime  of  high
     noise  using  deep  neural  network:  Trotterized  dynamics.  Quantum  Information
     Processing 23(3) (2024)https://doi.org/10.1007/s11128-024-04296-y

[41]Zhang, B., Majumder, S., Leung, P.H., Crain, S., Wang, Y., Fang, C., Debroy,
     D.M.,  Kim,  J.,  Brown,  K.R.:  Hidden  inverses:  Coherent  error  cancellation  at
     the circuit level. Physical Review Applied 17(3) (2022)https://doi.org/10.1103/
     physrevapplied.17.034074

[42]Kaufmann,  N.,  Rojkov,  I.,  Reiter,  F.:  Characterization  of  Coherent  Errors  in
     Noisy Quantum Devices (2023).https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08741

[43]Majumder,  S.,  Yale,  C.G.,  Morris,  T.D.,  Lobser,  D.S.,  Burch,  A.D.,  Chow,
     M.N.H.,  Revelle,  M.C.,  Clark,  S.M.,  Pooser,  R.C.:  Characterizing  and  mitigat-
     ing  coherent  errors  in  a  trapped  ion  quantum  processor  using  hidden  inverses.
     Quantum 7, 1006 (2023)https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-05-15-1006

[44]Wallman, J.J., Emerson, J.: Noise tailoring for scalable quantum computation via
     randomized compiling. Physical Review A 94(5) (2016)https://doi.org/10.1103/
     physreva.94.052325

[45]Perrin,  H.,  Scoquart,  T.,  Shnirman,  A.,  Schmalian,  J.,  Snizhko,  K.:  Mitigat-
     ing  crosstalk  errors  by  randomized  compiling:  Simulation  of  the  bcs  model  on
     a  superconducting  quantum  computer.  Physical  Review  Research  6(1)  (2024)
     https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevresearch.6.013142

[46]Niu,  S.,  Todri-Sanial,  A.,  Bronn,  N.T.:  Multi-qubit  Dynamical  Decoupling  for
     Enhanced Crosstalk Suppression (2024).https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.05391

[47]Evert, B., Izquierdo, Z.G., Sud, J., Hu, H.-Y., Grabbe, S., Rieffel, E.G., Reagor,
     M.J., Wang, Z.: Syncopated Dynamical Decoupling for Suppressing Crosstalk in
     Quantum Circuits (2024).https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07836

[48]Qiskit contributors: Qiskit: An Open-source Framework for Quantum Computing
     (2023).https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2573505

[49]Kay, A.: Tutorial on the quantikz package (2023)arXiv:1809.03842[quant-ph]

[50]Babukhin, D.https://github.com/dbabukhin/Echo                      evolution    nn  qem

[51]Liao, M., Zhu, Y., Chiribella, G., Yang, Y.: Flexible Error Mitigation of Quantum
     Processes  with  Data  Augmentation  Empowered  Neural  Model  (2023).https://


                                                    27
     arxiv.org/abs/2311.01727

[52]Mehta, P., Bukov, M., Wang, C.-H., Day, A.G.R., Richardson, C., Fisher, C.K.,
     Schwab,  D.J.:  A  high-bias,  low-variance  introduction  to  machine  learning  for
     physicists. Physics Reports 810, 1–124 (2019)https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.
     2019.03.001

[53]Palmieri,  A.M.,  Kovlakov,  E.,  Bianchi,  F.,  Yudin,  D.,  Straupe,  S.,  Biamonte,
     J.D., Kulik, S.: Experimental neural network enhanced quantum tomography. npj
     Quantum Information 6(1) (2020)https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-020-0248-6

[54]Neugebauer, M., Fischer, L., J¨ager, A., Czischek, S., Jochim, S., Weidem¨uller, M.,
     G¨arttner, M.: Neural-network quantum state tomography in a two-qubit exper-
     iment. Physical Review A 102(4) (2020)https://doi.org/10.1103/physreva.102.
     042604

[55]Bukov,  M.,  Day,  A.G.R.,  Sels,  D.,  Weinberg,  P.,  Polkovnikov,  A.,  Mehta,  P.:
     Reinforcement learning in different phases of quantum control. Physical Review
     X 8(3) (2018)https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevx.8.031086

[56]Nielsen, M.A.: Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press (2018).
     http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/































                                                   28
FIG. C3: Upper: Values of correction efficiency K for forward-in-time evolution
of 100 random initial states for different gate errors (two-qubit gate errors q2 are
provided to quantify noise power). States are sorted with respect to the correction
efficiency value K. Every K value is calculated for average magnetization values
of magnetization of the spin system, with further averaging over 20 time points to
produce a single value (i.e., average over 20 K values for each time point). Lower:
percentage of positive K values for every initial states sample with 100 states.






                                                   29
FIG. D4: Values of observable values statistics for neural networks with different
widths of the hidden layer. Average values and standard deviation are calculated
over results from 50 realizations of neural networks with fixed hidden layer width.
Results are provided for data with different levels of noise (indicated with differ-
ent values of two-qubit gate noise q2). Left: observable values statistics before
correction with a trained neural network. Right: observable values statistics after
correction with a trained neural network.






                                                    30