                                                            Second-order  optimisation
                                                            strategies  for  neural  network
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta                     quantum  states
Research                                                    M.  Drissi1,  J.  W.  T.  Keeble2,  J.  Rozalén
                                                            Sarmiento3,4   and  A.  Rios2,3,4

Accepted  in  Phil.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  A                     1TRIUMF,  Vancouver,  V6T  2A3,  British  Columbia,
                                                            Canada
Subject   Areas:                                            2   Department  of  Physics,  University  of  Surrey,
quantum  physics,  nuclear  physics,                        Guildford  GU2  7XH,  United  Kingdom
artiﬁcial  intelligence,  game  theory                      3   Departament  de  Física  Quàntica  i  Astrofísica,
                                                            Universitat  de  Barcelona  (UB),  c.  Martí  i  Franquès
Keywords:                                                   1,  E08028  Barcelona,  Spain
neural  network  quantum  states,                           4   Institut  de  Ciències  del  Cosmos  (ICCUB),
Variational  Monte  Carlo,  game                            Universitat  de  Barcelona  (UB),  Barcelona,  Spain
theory,  decision  geometry,                                     MD,    0000-0001-9472-6280;  JWK,
optimisation                                                0000-0002-6248-929X;  JRS,                 0000-0002-0660-1216;

Author   for   correspondence:                              AR,   0000-0002-8759-3202

M.  Drissi
e-mail:  mdrissi@triumf.ca                                    The  Variational  Monte  Carlo  method  has  recently  seen
                                                              important  advances  through  the  use  of  neural  network
                                                              quantum  states.  While  more  and  more  sophisticated
                                                              ansätze  have  been  designed  to  tackle  a  wide  variety  of
                                                              quantum  many-body  problems,  modest  progress  has
                                                              been  made  on  the  associated  optimisation  algorithms.
                                                              In     this     work,     we     revisit     the     Kronecker-Factored
                                                              Approximate  Curvature,  an  optimiser  that  has  been
                                                              used  extensively  in  a  variety  of  simulations.  We  suggest
                                                              improvements  on  the  scaling  and  the  direction  of  this
                                                              optimiser,  and  ﬁnd  that  they  substantially  increase  its
                                                              performance  at  a  negligible  additional  cost.  We  also
                                                              reformulate   the   Variational   Monte   Carlo   approach
                                                              in    a    game    theory    framework,    to    propose    a    novel
                                                              optimiser   based   on   decision   geometry.   We   ﬁnd   that,
                                                              on   a   practical   test   case   for   continuous   systems,   this
                                                              new   optimiser   consistently   outperforms   any   of   the
                                                              KFAC   improvements   in   terms   of   stability,   accuracy
                                                              and  speed  of  convergence.  Beyond  Variational  Monte
                                                              Carlo,   the   versatility   of   this   approach   suggests   that
                                                              decision   geometry   could   provide   a   solid   foundation
                                                              for    accelerating    a    broad    class    of    machine    learning
                                                              algorithms.




                                                              ©          The     Authors.           Published     by     the     Royal     Society     under
                                                              the      terms      of      the      Creative      Commons      Attribution      License
                                                              http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
                                                              by/4.0/,   which   permits   unrestricted   use,   provided   the   original
                                                              author   and   source   are   credited.
1.   Introduction                                                                                                                                  2

Neural  network  quantum  states  (NQS)  have  been  recently  employed  to  represent  the  ground-state
wave  functions  of  several  quantum  many-body  systems  [1–                       11].  These  state-of-the-art  machine
learning  (ML)  tools  allow  for  numerically  eﬃcient  solutions  of  the  Schrödinger  equation,  while
keeping   the   relevant   information   of   the   wave   function   in   a   ﬁnite,   relatively   small   number   of
parameters.  The  primary  focus  of  NQS  has  been  to  leverage  advancements  in  ML  to  represent
the  widest  class  of  many-body  wave  functions.  The  ﬁrst  NQS  was  developed  in  Ref.  [                           1],  where
a   Restricted   Boltzmann   Machine   was   used   to   model   spin   systems.   More   recently,   the   ﬁeld   of
quantum  chemistry  has  seen  a  surge  of  ansätze  representing  the  wave  function  of  many-electron
systems  [2–    6].  Message-passing  architectures  have  also  been  proposed  to  tackle  strongly  correlated
fermionic  systems  [8,10,11].  A  key  ingredient  of  many  of  these  NQS  is  the  use  of  permutation-
equivariant   layers.   These   provide   an   eﬃcient   representation   of   the   required   antisymmetry   of
fermionic  many-body  wave  functions.
    To  tackle  the  quantum  many-body  problem,  NQS  are  usually  formulated  in  the  framework
of  Variational  Monte  Carlo  (VMC)  [12,13].  Like  any  variational  approach,  VMC  calculates  the
ground-state  of  a  many-body  system  by  minimising  the  expectation  value  of  the  energy  of  an
associated  Hamiltonian  over  a  class  of  trial  wave  functions.  Provided  the  class  is  large  enough,
this  approach  should  yield  a  good  approximation  of  the  ground  state,  even  in  the  case  of  strongly
interacting   particles.   Monte   Carlo   techniques   are   employed   to   estimate   the   many-body,   and
generally   high-dimensional,   integral   for   the   ground-state   energy.   In   practice,   with   NQS,   one
reformulates  the  physics  energy  minimisation  process  in  terms  of  a  ML  reinforcement  learning
problem.  The  loss  function  is  the  total  energy  of  the  system,  and  the  wave  function  is  learned  by
minimising  it.
    In   nuclear   physics,   speciﬁcally,   NQS   have   shown   promising   results.   Starting   from   a   simple
solution  to  the  deuteron  [14],  the  ﬁeld  has  quickly  evolved  towards  fully-ﬂedged  nuclear  structure
calculations  [15–      17].  Further  advances  in  architectures  have  opened  the  window  to  applications
in  periodic  systems  [18]  like  neutron  matter  [19],  and  in  models  based  on  the  occupation  number
formalism  [9].  The  NQS  reformulation  may  be  able  to  surpass  previous  eﬀorts  in  VMC  simulations
of   nuclear   systems   [20,21].   While   simulations   have   not   yet   reached   the   level   of   sophistication
of  other  ab   initio   methods  [22–       24],  NQS  have  the  potential  to  become  a  new  and  competitive
ﬁrst-principles  technique.
    Clearly,   the   optimisation   algorithm   in   this   minimisation   process   plays   a   critical   role   to
achieve  results  eﬃciently.  In  the  most  challenging  cases,  typically  involving  many  particles,  the
wall-time   per   epoch   may   increase   substantially.   With   these   cases   in   mind,   one   may   want   to
design  optimisation  strategies  that  reduce  the  total  number  of  epochs  while  keeping  a  reasonable
wall-time  per  epoch.  Typically,  optimisation  strategies  are  based  on  gradient  descent  methods,
which   exploit   the   ﬁrst-order   derivatives   of   the   loss   function   with   respect   to   the   variational
parameters.  In  a  ML  setting,  derivatives  are  eﬃciently  estimated  using  automatic  diﬀerentiation
(AD)  techniques  [25].  A  possible  approach  to  accelerate  the  optimisation  consists  in  approximating
second-order  derivatives  of  the  loss  function  to  incorporate  information  on  the  local  curvature
in  the  update  of  the  parameters.  This  typically  leads  to  a  trade-oﬀ,  where  the  total  number  of
epochs  to  converge  accurately  is  reduced  at  the  price  of  increasing  the  wall-time  per  epoch.
    The  Adam  [26]  and  Stochastic  Reconﬁguration  (SR)  [                    27,28]  optimisers  have  been  extensively
used  in  the  NQS  community.  While  Adam  provides  a  stable  and  robust  optimisation  strategy,  its
convergence  to  accurate  results  is  generally  fairly  slow.  As  an  example,  Refs.  [3,7]  indicate  that
Adam  requires  between  104   to  105   epochs  to  reach  an  accuracy  of  5%  in  the  correlation  energy.
In  contrast,  SR  has  been  shown  to  work  remarkably  well  and  has  become  a  key  factor  in  VMC
calculations  [1,8,9,15,16,29].
    The  Kronecker-Factored  Approximate  Curvature  (KFAC)  [30]  optimiser  has  also  been  shown
to   perform   notably   well   [30–      32]   and   has   been   essential   in   VMC   calculations   for   some   of   the
most   challenging   cases   [3,5,6,33].   However,   the   KFAC   optimiser   was   originally   designed   for
supervised  learning  problems  [30]  and  has  mostly  been  tested  with  standard  feed-forward  neural                                          3
networks  (NN).  Despite  several  extensions,  for  example  to  include  convolutional  layers  [31],  the
justiﬁcation  of  its  applicability  to  VMC  with  NQS  remains  unclear.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  to  bypass
problems  encountered  with  KFAC  in  VMC,  several  groups  have  come  up  with  a  series  of  ad   hoc
adjustments  to  rectify  a  posteriori   the  update  on  the  parameters  obtained  from  KFAC  [3].  These
adjustments  go  against  the  philosophy  originally  advocated  in  Ref.  [30],  which  suggested  that
the  learning  rate  and  momentum  should  be  automatically  adjusted  based  on  the  exact  Fisher
matrix,  and  where  the  damping  was  dynamically  adjusted  using  a  Levenberg-Marquardt  rule.
    In   this   work,   we   revisit   the   original   KFAC   optimiser   and   review   its   formulation   within   a
VMC-NQS  framework.  We  aim  to  tackle  its  shortcomings  at  the  very  basis,  in  order  to  build  a
new  versatile  optimiser  that  may  accelerate  VMC  calculations  for  a  wide  variety  of  many-body
problems.  We  introduce  in  Sec.             2 the  quantum  many-body  problem  that  we  use  as  a  test  bed:
strongly-interacting   polarised   fermions   in   a   one-dimensional   harmonic   trap.   The   NQS   ansatz
used   in  VMC   and  the   general  KFAC   algorithm  are   also   brieﬂy   discussed.   Then,  in   Sec.                        3,   we
single   out   several   important   issues   that   we   encountered   with   the   original   implementation   of
KFAC.  We  show  how  these  relate  to  fundamental  aspects  of  VMC  and  NQS,  namely  the  use  of
the  energy  as  a  loss  function  and  the  use  of  permutation  equivariant  layers.  From  this  analysis,
we  build  a  new,  improved  KFAC-like  optimiser  that  addresses  directly  these  issues  and  shows
a   dramatic   improvement   in   terms   of   stability   and   accuracy.   Finally,   in   Sec.                4,   we   revisit   the
underlying  information  geometry  [34,35]  on  which  KFAC  is  built  [30].  We  reformulate  the  VMC
problem  in  a  game  theory  setting,  which  motivates  an  alternative  decision  geometry  [36–                              38].  A
novel  optimiser  based  on  this  decision  geometry  is  then  introduced,  which  outperforms  any  of
the  previously  tested  optimisers.

2.   Quantum  many-body  model
(a)   System  and  Hamiltonian

In  the  following,  we  provide  a  general  discussion  on  optimisation  strategies  for  quantum  many-
body  systems.  For  concreteness  and  pedagogical  purposes,  several  aspects  of  the  discussion  are
illustrated   with   a   simple   many-body   system   [7].   The   toy   model   we   consider   is   a   system   of   A
fermions  of  mass  m,  trapped  in  a  one-dimensional  harmonic  well  [7].  For  simplicity,  we  assume
the  system  to  be  fully  polarised  and  thus  neglect  spin  eﬀects.  We  employ  Harmonic  Oscillator
(HO)  units  and  choose  a  Gaussian-shaped  two-body  interaction  with  range  Ã0   and  strength  V0,
inspired  by  nuclear-physics  applications  [7].  The  Hamiltonian  of  the  system  thus  reads

                                            A∑                A∑                     ∑      −  (xi −xj )2
                              H  =  −   1        ∇2i   +   1      x2i   +          V0√    e       2σ    20           .                                                   (2.1)
                                        2  i=1           2  i=1             2ÃÃ0     i<j

Throughout   this   work,   we   use   this   system   as   a   toy   model   to   benchmark   the   performance   of
diﬀerent  energy  optimisation  schemes.  Speciﬁcally,  we  change  the  number  of  particles  from       A = 2
to  6  and  the  interaction  strength,  V0,  from  −20  to  20.  We  keep  a  ﬁxed  interaction  range,    Ã0  = 0.5,
which  allows  for  an  exploration  of  the  non-perturbative  regime  [7].
    This   system   has   the   advantage   to   be   simple   while   displaying   a   rich   phenomenology.   Its
simplicity  allows  us  to  explore  many  diﬀerent  optimisation  scenarios  while,  its  phenomenological
diversity   supports   the   fact   that   our   conclusions   can   not   be   too   speciﬁc   to   the   many-body
problem   we   consider.   In   particular,   when   varying   V0    between   −20   and   20,   the   many-body
system  undergoes  a  transition  from  a  strongly  attractive  regime,  where  spinless  fermions  behave
like  a  non-interacting  bosonic  system  [39–              41],  to  a  strongly  repulsive  regime,  akin  to  that  of  a
crystal  [42,43].
    As  an  illustrative  example,  we  show  in  Fig.           1 the  one-body  density  proﬁle,    n(x),  as  a  function  of
the  spatial  position  for  the  A = 6  system.  The  diﬀerent  panels  correspond  to  diﬀerent  interaction
strengths.   We   show   our   NQS   prediction   with   a   solid   line,   but   provide   also   two   additional
                  3      V0 = -20              V0 = -10              V0 = 0              V0 = 10               V0 = 20
                     (a)                  (b)                   (c)          NQS     (d)                  (e)         A=6
                                                                             CI                                    0 = 0.5                              4
                  2                                                          HF


                  1


                  06    4   2 0   2  4    6  4   2 0   2  4    6   4  2  0  2   4   6   4  2  0  2   4    6  4   2 0   2  4
                        Position, x          Position, x          Position, x          Position, x          Position, x
Figure  1:  The  density  proﬁle    n(x)  of  6-particle  system  as  a  function  of  position  x.  Panels  (a)  to
(e)  show  results  for  values  of  V0   from  −20  to  20  in  steps  of  10.  The  solid  blue  line  corresponds
to   the   VMC-NQS   simulations.   Dashed   red   lines   show   the   direct   diagonalisation   (CI)   results,
whereas  the  purple  dashed-dotted  line  displays  the  Hartree-Fock  (HF)  approximation.



benchmarks.  Dashed  lines  correspond  to  a  conﬁguration  interaction  (CI)  result.  This  employs
a   full   direct   diagonalisation   of   the   Hamiltonian   within   a   given   conﬁguration   space   [                     44].   The
associated  Hartree-Fock  (HF)  results  are  shown  with  dash-dotted  lines.
    The  central  panel  (c)  shows  the  non-interacting  case,  V0  = 0.  It  displays  an  overall  Gaussian-
like  proﬁle  with  a  series  of     6  superimposed  peaks,  which  are  characteristic  of  fermion  systems.
Panels   (a)   and   (b),   to   the   left   of   the   centre,   show   the   attractive   regime   with   V0  = −20   and
V0  = −10,  respectively.  In  this  region,  the  wiggles  disappear  and  the  density  proﬁle  acquires  a
dumbbell  shape.  This  relatively  featureless  density  proﬁle  is  reminiscent  of  a  bosonic  system  [                               7].
In  this  regime,  the  CI  results  disagree  with  the  NQS  prediction  because  of  the  truncation  of  the
model  space,  which  is  performed  for  practical  numerical  reasons.  Here,  and  in  the  following,  we
will  not  show  CI  results  for  V0  = −20  for  this  reason.
    Panels  (d)  and  (e)  correspond  to  the  repulsive  regime  for  values  of  the  interaction  strength
V0  = 10  and  20.  They  suggest  a  very  diﬀerent  behaviour  of  the  density  proﬁle  in  the  repulsive
regime.  The  system  does  not  change  substantially  in  average  size,  but  the  fermionic  oscillations
on  top  of  the  smooth  behaviour  become  much  more  pronounced.  This  is  a  sign  of  localisation,
or  crystallisation,  in  the  system.  For  more  details  on  the  physics  of  this  model,  we  refer  to  our
previous  work  in  Ref.  [7].

(b)   The  Variational  Monte  Carlo  method

To  compute  the  ground  state  of  the  Hamiltonian  in  Eq.  (2.1)  we  follow  a  VMC  approach  [12]
and  aim  at  solving  the  many-body  problem  using  the  Rayleigh-Ritz  variational  principle,
                                                      ⟨  Ψ A⏐⏐  H⏐⏐  Ψ A⟩
                                                         ⟨  Ψ A⏐⏐Ψ A⟩           g E Ag.s.   ,                                                                                                     (2.2)


where   E A⏐⏐Ψ A⟩    is  not  in  general  the  exact  ground  state,  but  rather  a  trial  wave  function  |ΨT ð  that  dependsg.s.   denotes   the   exact   A-body   ground-state   energy   of   H .   In   VMC,   the   wave   function

on  a  series  of  parameters.  Using  the  Rayleigh-Ritz  variational  principle,  the  original  eigenvalue
problem  can  thus  be  recast  as  an  optimisation  problem  in  the  subspace  of  trial  wave  functions.
    In  practice,  three  major  challenges  need  to  be  faced  to  solve  this  optimisation  problem.  First
of   all,   the   Hilbert   space   of   A-body   states   in   the   optimisation   search   is   in   principle   inﬁnite-
dimensional.  This  diﬃculty  is  usually  tackled  by  introducing  the  much  smaller  set  of  trial  states
|ΨT ð  over  which  the  energy  is  minimised.  In  doing  so,  a  bias  is  introduced  on  the  solution,  which
is  usually  estimated  by  varying  the  size  of  the  set  of  trial  states.  A  second  diﬃculty  comes  from
the   necessity   to   evaluate   the   expectation   value   of   the   energy   over   many   diﬀerent   trial   states.
Each  estimate  consists  of  an  integral  of  at  least  dimension  D  ×  A,  where  D   denotes  the  number
of   space   dimensions.   To   mitigate   the   cost   of   evaluating   these   high-dimensional   integrals,   one
resorts  to  Monte  Carlo  estimates,  which  necessarily  introduce  a  statistical  noise  on  the  energy.
This  can  in  principle  be  controlled  by  using  a  large  enough  number  of  samples  in  the  Monte  Carlo
estimate.  Finally,  the  third  challenge  is  to  ﬁnd  the  solution  of  a  global  non-linear  optimisation                                            5
problem.   Here,   the   established   strategy   consists   in   breaking   the   problem   into   a   sequence   of
simpler,  local-quadratic  optimisation  sub-problems,  which  are  solved  iteratively.  Such  iterative
optimisers   have   the   advantage   of   versatility   and   can   be   used   for   many   diﬀerent   optimisation
problems.  However,  they  often  require  adjustments  to  converge  in  a  reasonable  time  [45].
    The  third  challenge  is  the  main  focus  of  this  work,  and  we  will  address  it  in  section                          3.  Before
diving  into  it,  we  provide  some  details  on  our  NQS  strategy,  which  will  be  useful  to  frame  the
global  discussion  on  the  optimisation  strategy.

(c)   Neural  Quantum  States  and  Monte  Carlo  sampling
Our  NQS  ansatz  is  a  fully  antisymmetric  NN,  inspired  by  the  implementation  of  FermiNet  [3].
The   inputs   to   our   network   are   the   A   positions   of   fermions   in   the   system,   {xi, i = 1, . . . , A},
and   the   output   is   the   many-body   wave   function   Ψθ  (x1, . . . , xA)   in   the   log   domain.   The   state
depends   on   a   series   of   network   weights   and   biases,   succinctly   summarised   by   a   variable   ¹   of
dimension  N   [7].  The  network  is  composed  of  4  core  components:  equivariant  layers,  generalised
Slater  matrices  (GSMs),  Gaussian  log-envelope  functions,  and  a  summed  signed-log  determinant
function  [46].  The  equivariant  layers  have  the  particularity  of  sharing  a  common  set  of  weights
and  biases  among  the  A  input  positions.  This  weight  sharing  is  critical  in  order  to  enforce  total
antisymmetry  of  the  wave  function  and,  as  discussed  later,  will  impact  the  rationale  justifying
KFAC.  For  all  calculations  presented  in  this  work,  the  number  of  equivariant  layers  L  is  set  to
L = 2;  their  width,  H ,  is  H  = 64;  and  we  only  use  one  GSM.  We  stress  that  the  orbitals  making
a   GSM   are   functions   depending   on   the   positions   of   al l    the   particles,   thus   departing   from   a
standard   Slater   matrix.   These   so-called   backﬂow   correlations   are   key   in   obtaining   a   faithful
representation  of  the  exact  state  [7,47].  In  total,  our  wave  function  ansatz  depends  on  about  104
parameters,  which  have  to  be  optimised  to  solve  the  many-body  problem.
    The   expectation   value   of   the   energy,   in   Eq.   (2.2),   is   typically   formulated   as   a   statistical
average  over  local   energies,
                                  E(¹) ≡  ïΨθ  |H |Ψθ  ð                     [   Ψθ  (X )−1H Ψθ  (X )]       ,                                                           (2.3)
                                                ïΨθ  |Ψθ  ð       = EX ∼pθ

where  we  deﬁne     X  = (x1, . . . , xA)  as  an  A-dimensional  random  variable  (or  walker)  distributed
according   to   the   Born   probability   of   the   many-body   wave   function,  pθ   = |Ψθ  |2.   For   numerical
stability,  the  kinetic  energy  is  computed  in  the  log  domain.  For  a  general  local  interaction,  the
local  energy  in  a  continuous  model  reads

                                                            A∑   [   ∂ 2xi  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  +  (∂xi  ln |Ψθ  (X )|)2]     +  V  (X )  .          (2.4)
     EL,θ    (X ) ≡ Ψθ  (X )−1H Ψθ  (X ) = − 12
                                                           i=1
For  our  speciﬁc  model,  the  interaction  terms  are

                                                         A∑                      ∑       −  (xi −xj )2
                                       V  (X ) ≡  1          x2i   +          V0√      e       2σ    20           .                                                                    (2.5)
                                                    2  i=1              2ÃÃ0     i<j

To   sample   the   statistical   averages   over   the   Born   probability   pθ  ,   we   use   NW   = 4096   walkers
propagated  following  a  Metropolis-Hastings  algorithm  (MH)  [48,49]  with  on-the-ﬂy  adaptation
of  the  proposal  distribution  width  [33].  In  order  to  neglect  any  biases  due  to  autocorrelation  in
our  comparison  of  multiple  optimisers,  we  perform  400  MH  iterations  per  epoch,  to  ensure  the
thermalisation  of  the  Markov  chain.  The  optimisation  process  requires  not  only  the  evaluation  of
the  energy  expectation  value,  E(¹),  but  also  the  gradients  with  respect  to  all  the  parameters  of
the  network  ∇θ  E(¹).  These  are  evaluated  as  a  statistical  average  according  to
                              ∇θ  E(¹) = 2EX ∼pθ           [(       EL,θ    (X )  −  E(¹))     ∇θ   ln |Ψθ  (X )|]       .                                                  (2.6)
     Finally,  to  provide  a  reasonable  starting  point  to  the  energy  minimisation  algorithms,  we  drive                                               6
the  NQS  through  a  pre-training  phase.  This  is  a  supervised  learning  problem,  where  we  demand
that  the  network  reproduce  the  many-body  wave  function  of  the  non-interacting  system  [7,46].
Throughout   this   work,   the   parameters   of   the   network   are   randomly   initialised   before   going
through   103   pre-training   epochs   using   the   Adam   optimiser.   The   ﬁnal   pre-trained   NQS   is   the
starting  point  for  all  the  optimisation  algorithms  that  we  consider.  For  a  given  particular  system
(number  of  particles  A  and  interaction  strength  V0),  we  always  start  from  the  same  exact  NQS
and  set  of  samples.  This  guarantees  that  any  diﬀerences  that  arise  in  the  optimisation  process
are   due   to   the   optimisers   themselves.   We   refer   the   reader   to   the   Supplemental   Material   and
to  Refs.  [7,46]  for  more  details  on  the  Monte  Carlo  sampling  and  the  pre-training  used  in  our
calculations.

3.   Optimisation  within  a  Variational  Monte  Carlo  framework
In  this  section,  we  present  a  series  of  optimisation  strategies  that  we  test  to  solve  VMC  with  NQS.
First,  we  provide  an  initial  overview  of  the  general  strategy  to  solve  the  optimisation  problem  at
hand.  Then,  we  provide  the  rationale  and  details  for  the  speciﬁc  optimisers  we  consider,  namely
the  Natural  Gradient  Descent  and  its  KFAC  approximation.  Finally,  building  on  the  shortcomings
of  KFAC,  we  discuss  several  improvements  and  test  the  newly  developed  optimisation  strategies.

(a)   General  optimisation  strategy

Solving  a  global,  non-linear  optimisation  problem  is  a  diﬃcult  task.  In  this  work,  we  consider
optimisers  that  follow  the  same  underlying  strategy,  sometimes  referred  to  as  sequential  quadratic
programming   [45].  In  our  case,  the  general  problem  takes  the  form,

                                                          E ∗  = minθ    E(¹)  ,                                                                                                               (3.1a)
                                                           ¹∗  = argminθ    E(¹)  .                                                                                                      (3.1b)

This  problem  is  divided  into  a  sequence  of  simpler  sub-problems  which  are  solved  iteratively.  The
nth   sub-problem   consists   of   (a)   an   initial   guess   on   the   set   of   parameters,   ¹n;   (b)   a   quadratic
model,  Mn,  approximating  the  loss  function  E(¹)  locally;  and  (c)  a  trust  region,  Tn,  specifying
where  the  local  model  is  expected  to  be  a  good  approximation  to  the  loss  function  [45].  Formally,
solving  the  nth   sub-problem  consists  in  computing  a  new  energy  estimate,  En+1,  at  the  updated
parameters,  ¹n+1,  namely

                                                En+1  = E(¹n+1)  ,                                                                                                                                  (3.2a)
                                                 ¹n+1  = ¹n  +  argminδ  ∈Tn   Mn(¶)  .                                                                                (3.2b)

Here,  ¶   represents  the  update  in  the  parameters  and  the  quadratic  model  Mn   takes  the  form

                                                    Mn(¶) =  12 ¶TQ¶  +  LT¶  +  C   ,                                                                                            (3.3)

where    Q    is    a    matrix;    L,    a    vector;    and    C ,    a    scalar.    In    practice,    the    constrained    quadratic
optimisation  sub-problem  is  replaced  by  an  equivalent  unconstrained  regularised  sub-problem,
                                                                                  (                                 )
                           ¶n  ≡ argminδ  ∈Tn   Mn(¶) = argminδ                      Mn(¶)  +   12 ¼n¶TRn¶              ,                                          (3.4)

where   ¼n   is   a   damping   parameter,   characterising   the   size   of   the   equivalent   trust   region   and
Rn   is  a  symmetric  positive  semi-deﬁnite  matrix  describing  the  shape  of  the  trust  region.  This
procedure  is  often  referred  to  as  Tikhonov  regularisation  [45,50].  Importantly,  not  only  are  the
energy   and   the   parameters,   (En, ¹n),   updated   at   each   iteration,   but   also   the   local   quadratic
model  and  its  trust  region  (or  regularisation),  (Mn(¶), Tn).  Explicitly,  Eq.  (3.4)  has  the  general
solution                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                           ¶n  = − (Q  +  ¼nRn)−1  L  .                                                                                                  (3.5)

In  practice  ¶n   is  obtained  by  solving  the  linear  system

                                                             (Q  +  ¼nRn) ¶n  = −L  .                                                                                                      (3.6)

     As  an  instructive  example,  the  standard  gradient  descent  method  can  be  formulated  in  this
framework.  In  this  case,  one  solves  iteratively  the  locally  constrained  sub-problems  associated  to
the  model

                                                     M GDn       (¶) = ∇E(¹n)T¶  +  E(¹n)  ,                                                                                        (3.7)

with  trust  region

                                                   T GDn         = { ¶  : ∥¶∥2  f ³∥∇E(¹n)∥2  }    ,                                                                                  (3.8)

where  ∥.∥2   denotes  the  standard  Euclidean  norm.  In  this  case,  the  update  on  the  parameter  ¶n
reads  explicitly
                                                               ¶GDn        = −³  ∇E(¹n)  .                                                                                                          (3.9)

When   solving   this   sequence   of   local   constrained   sub-problems,   one   is   eﬀectively   performing   a
gradient  descent  with  a  learning  rate  ³.

(b)   Natural  Gradient  Descent

Equations   (3.7)-(3.8)   indicate   that   the   standard   gradient   descent   algorithm   relies   on   setting
an  isotropic  constraint  on  the  size  of  the  update  parameter,  ¶n,  based  on  the  Euclidean  norm.
In   a   general   setting,   the   Euclidean   norm   has   no   reason   to   be   an   optimal   choice.   Diﬀerent
gradient  descent  algorithms  have  been  designed  in  an  attempt  to  outperform  the  standard  version
presented  in  the  previous  subsection.  The  natural   gradient   descent   (NGD)  algorithm,  which  has
been  advocated  to  be  optimal  for  a  class  of  optimisation  problems,  is  of  particular  interest  [51,52].
This  algorithm  is  the  starting  point  of  the  KFAC  optimiser  [30].
     The  NGD  was  originally  deﬁned  in  a  supervised  learning  setting,  where  the  goal  is  to  learn
an  empirically  sampled  distribution  q   by  minimising  a  loss  function.  One  particular  loss  function,
chosen  here  for  pedagogical  reasons,  is  the  cross-entropy,  namely

                                                       Lsup(¹) = EX ∼q  [− ln pθ  (X )]    .                                                                                      (3.10)

Here,   pθ     is   a   probability   distribution,   depending   on   several   parameters   ¹,   that   is   adjusted
to   minimise   the   cross-entropy   loss.   In   this   case,   the   manifold   of   the   probability   distributions
pθ     possesses   a   natural   geometry   commonly   referred   to   as   information   geometry   [34,35].   The
information  geometry  is  deﬁned  by  the  Kullback-Leibler  (KL)  divergence  between  two  probability
distributions
                                   DKL(pθ  ,    pθ   ′ ) ≡ EX ∼pθ    [− ln pθ   ′ (X )  −  (− ln pθ  (X ))]    .                                                  (3.11)

Although   the   KL   divergence   does   not   satisfy   all   the   axioms   of   a   distance,   it   deﬁnes   locally   a
metric  obtained  by  Taylor-expanding  it  at  second-order,  namely

                                               DKL(pθ  ,    pθ  +δ  ) =  12 ¶TF (¹)¶  +  O(    ¶3)       ,                                                                        (3.12)

where   F (¹)   is   the   Fisher   information   matrix   (FIM).   The   expansion   is   performed   around   the
“diagonal”  point,     pθ   =    pθ   ′ .  From  the  expansion,  one  obtains  an  explicit  expression  for  the  FIM,
                                         F (¹)θ   i θ   j  ≡ EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   i  ln pθ  (X )∂θ   j  ln pθ  (X )]       ,                                                             (3.13)

where   ¹i   and   ¹j   are   individual   components   of   the   global   parameter   vector,   ¹.   In   this   context,
the   NGD   consists   simply   in   performing   a   gradient   descent   with   a   trust   region   deﬁned   by   the
norm   associated   to   the   FIM.   For   example,   T NGDn             = { ¶  : ¶TF (¹n)¶  f r2  } ,   where   r  > 0   denotes
the  maximum  size  of  an  update  on  ¶n.  As  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  more  practical  to  work  with
an  equivalent  unconstrained  regularised  problem.  In  the  case  of  NGD  for  VMC,  the  regularised                                                    8
local  model  is
                                M NGD-regn                      (¶) = ¼F  12 ¶TF (¹n)¶  +  ∇E(¹n)T¶  +  E(¹n)  ,                                                 (3.14)

where  the  damping  ¼F    is  a  function  of  the  size  of  T NGDn            .  Equivalently,  the  update  minimising
M NGD-regn                      (¶)  can  be  expressed  as

                                               ¶NGD-regn                       = −³  F −1(¹n)∇E(¹n)  ,                                                                                 (3.15)

where  ³  is  a  learning  rate  related  to  the  size  of  T NGDn            .
    The  reasons  for  using  NGD  as  an  optimiser  for  our  NQS  are  diverse.  In  the  context  of  VMC,
a  quantum  generalisation  of  NGD,  the  so-called  Stochastic  Reconﬁguration  (SR),  provides  the
foundation  for  many  state-of-the-art  optimisers  used  with  NQS  [9,53,54].  SR  has  been  shown  to
converge  to  exact  results  in  challenging  many-body  settings  [55,56].  The  metric  employed  in  SR  is
the  real  part  of  the  so-called  quantum  geometric  tensor  (QGT)  [54].  While  SR  and  NGD  diﬀer  in
general,  the  QGT  can  be  shown  to  reduce  to  the  FIM  when  considering  a  manifold  of  real-valued
ansätze   which   is   the   case   of   the   NQS   we   consider   here.   For   VMC   calculations,   the   use   of   SR
is  motivated  by  the  fact  that  the  QGT  favours  directions  with  a  higher  signal-to-noise  ratio  in
the  estimator  of  the  energy  gradient,  and  by  its  interpretation  as  an  imaginary-time  projection
technique  [53].  Beyond  the  sole  case  of  VMC  calculations,  two  critical  properties  of  the  FIM  have
been  raised  for  explaining  the  performances  of  NGD  for  general  supervised  learning  problems:  (i)
the  FIM  is  symmetric  deﬁnite  positive  and  (ii)  it  provides  an  approximation  to  the  Hessian  of
the  loss  function  [32].  Point  (i)  is  important  to  avoid  instabilities  in  the  directions  associated  to
negative  eigenvalues  of  the  quadratic  term,  so  that  updates  in  the  parameters  remain  bounded.
Point  (ii)  leads  to  a  re-interpretation  of  NGD  as  a  second-order  optimisation  scheme,  where  the
Hessian  of  the  loss  function  is  approximated  by  the  FIM.  This  motivates  the  minimisation  of  a
model
                                     M NGDn            (¶) =  12 ¶TF (¹n)¶  +  ∇E(¹n)T¶  +  E(¹n)  ,                                                           (3.16)

which  leads  to  the  update  in  the  parameters

                                                   ¶NGDn             = −F −1(¹n)∇E(¹n)  .                                                                                         (3.17)

This  interpretation  of  NGD  is  equivalent  to  ﬁxing  the  learning  rate  to  unity,    ³ = 1,  in  Eq.  (3.15).

(c)   KFAC  algorithm

A  practical  implementation  of  the  NGD  algorithm  requires  computing  the  update  in  Eq.  (3.17).
In  the  case  of  NN  models,  the  number  of  parameters,  N ,  is  large  (N  k 104).  Computing  exactly
the   update   ¶NGDn              at   every   epoch   can   be   computationally   prohibitive.   The   goal   of   the   KFAC
algorithm  is  to  compute  an  approximation  to  the  update  ¶NGDn              with  a  time  complexity  of  O (N )
while   keeping   the   number   of   epochs   to   convergence   roughly   constant.   We   note   that,   for   the
speciﬁc  case  of  NQS,  it  has  been  recently  shown  that  one  can  reformulate  the  update    ¶NGDn              in  a
way  which  signiﬁcantly  reduces  the  time  complexity  of  the  implementation  [                                  55–  57].
    Consider   a   feed-forward   NN   of   arbitrary   depth.   For   a   given   layer   l,   we   denote   the   weight
matrix   W (l)    and,   for   simplicity,   we   assume   it   to   be   of   size   H  ×  H    and   without   bias.   The
input  row-vector  f (l−1)  ∈ R1×H   and  the  output  row-vector  h(l)  ∈ R1×H   are  related  according  to(
h(l)  = tanh       f (l−1)W (l)T)         ,  where  the  activation  function  tanh  is  applied  element-wise1.  In  this
work,  we  follow  the  convention  used  in  the  PyTorch  framework,  where  inputs  and  outputs  of  a
layer  are  row  vectors.
    In  the  KFAC  algorithm  originally  described  in  Ref.  [30],  the  FIM  is  approximated  in  two  ways.
First,  the  matrix  elements  between  parameters  of  diﬀerent  layers  are  neglected.  The  approximated

1We   focus   on   this   activation   function   because   it   is   the   one   of   choice   in   our   NQS   model   [7],   but   any   other   choice
would   not   change   our   conclusions.
FIM,    ˘F (¹),  is  block-diagonal  and  reads                                                                                                                            9
                                                                      
                                           ˘F (¹)W  (l)                   F (¹)W  (l)ij    W  (l′ )
                                                                                            i′ j′           if  l  = l′                              (3.18)
                                                     ij    W  (l′ )i′ j′   ≡0                                                   if  l  ̸= l′   ,

where  W (l)ij      is  the  parameter  associated  to  the  matrix  element  (i, j)  of  the  lth   layer  weight  matrix.
Second,  each  layer-dependent  block  is  approximated  by  a  Kronecker  product.  Using  the  chain
rule,  the  FIM  derivatives  can  be  rewritten  as
                                                                                        ( ∑                         )
                     ∂  ln pθ    =    ∂h(l)1i   ∂  ln pθ    = f (l−1)                             f (l−1)                ×   ∂  ln pθ    .                      (3.19)
                     ∂W (l)          ∂W (l)      ∂h(l)            1j            ×  tanh′            1k          W (l)ik       ∂h(l)
                           ij              ij         1i                                      k                                   1i
Introducing  the  so-called  forward  activations,  a(l−1),  and  the  backward  sensitivities,  e(l),  as  the
row  vectors

                                          a(l−1)1j           ≡ f (l−1)1j             ,                                                                                                                                                     (3.20a)
                                                                  ( ∑                          )
                                               e(l)1i   ≡ tanh′             f (l−1)1k          W (l)ki×   ∂  ln pθ ,                                                            (3.20b)
                                                                        k                               ∂h(l)1i

we  obtain                                  (      ∂  ln pθ)           (
                                      vec      ∂W (l)        = vec       e(l)a(l−1)T)         = a(l−1)  ¹  e(l)   ,                                                       (3.21)

where   vec(.)   and   (.  ¹  .)   denote   respectively   the   standard   vectorisation   (stacking   columns   of   a
matrix)  and  Kronecker  product  operations.  Using  Eq.  (3.21),  the  lth   block  of  the  FIM  can  be
rewritten  in  vectorised  form  as[                                                         [ (
                                       (      ∂  ln pθ)       (      ∂  ln pθ)     T]
        ˘F (l)(¹) = Epθ          vec                    vec                        = Epθ          a(l−1)  ¹  e(l))(         a(l−1)  ¹  e(l))     T]
                                          ∂W (l)                 ∂W (l)
                              [(                                (
                    = Epθ          a(l−1)a(l−1)T)           ¹      e(l)e(l)T)]        .                                                                                                                        (3.22)

Finally,  the  Kronecker-factored  approximation  on  the  lth  block  of  the  FIM,    ˘F (l)KFAC(¹),  is  obtained
by  exchanging  the  order  of  the  Kronecker  product  and  the  statistical  average,  i.e.
                                                                 [                                    [
                                      ˘F (l)KFAC(¹) ≡ Epθ          a(l−1)a(l−1)T]          ¹ Epθ        e(l)e(l)T]       .                                                     (3.23)

The  resulting  block-diagonal  KFAC  FIM  will  be  denoted  as    ˘FKFAC(¹)  from  now  on.
     Assuming    a    unit    learning    rate,    the    update    in    the    parameters    when    using    the    KFAC
approximation  thus  reads
                                                    ∆KFACn               ≡ −  ˘F −1KFAC(¹n)∇E(¹n)  .                                                                                   (3.24)

We   employ   a   capital   ∆KFACn                 to   diﬀerentiate   it   from   previous   parameter   updates.   The   main
advantage  of  the  KFAC  approximation  is  that,  instead  of  having  to  invert  a  matrix  of  dimension
(L  ×  H 2)  ×  (L  ×  H 2),  one  can  invert  separately  the  2L  Kronecker  factors  in  Eq.  (3.23),  which  are
much  smaller  matrices  of  dimension  H  ×  H .  The  main  drawback  is  that  the  KFAC  approximation
is  very  crude  and  can  only  catch  the  very  coarse  structure  of  the  exact  FIM  [30].  For  completeness,
let  us  also  mention  that  the  two  Kronecker  factors  are  averaged  over  successive  epochs,  with  a
maximum  exponentially  decay  value  set  to  0.9  [30].
     To  compensate  for  the  poor  quality  of  the  update  ∆KFACn              ,  a  second  step  was  designed  in  the
original  KFAC  algorithm  [30].  The  idea  is  that,  whenever  ∆KFACn                provides  a  good  direction,  we
would   like   to   take   a   big   step.   In   contrast,   when   the   direction   is   poor,   we   would   like   to   take   a
small  step,  to  avoid  increasing  the  loss  function.  In  the  original  KFAC  algorithm,  this  is  achieved
by  computing  an  optimal  rescaling  factor  ³  such  that  the  quadratic  model  M NGDn  (    ³∆KFACn  )    ,
which   uses   the   exact    FIM,   is   minimised.   In   addition,   a   momentum   in   the   previous   update
¶KFACn−1        is  usually  included.  A  natural  way  to  include  both  improvements  consists  in  minimising
M NGD                                        )     over  the  two  parameters  ³  and  µ.  Explicitly,  the  optimal  coeﬃcients
   n  (    ³∆KFACn               +  µ¶KFACn−1                                                                                                                    10
³∗   and  µ∗   are  obtained  from  the  linear  system
                    (      ³∗)        (        ∆TnF (¹n)∆n              ∆TnF (¹n)¶n−1       )        −1(        ∇E(¹n)T∆n    )
                       µ∗      = −      ¶Tn−1F (¹n)∆n        ¶Tn−1F (¹n)¶n−1                           ∇E(¹n)T¶n−1                ,                       (3.25)

where  we  momentarily  drop  the  superindex  KFAC  in  all  the  ∆n   and  ¶n   updates  for  simplicity.
Using  the  exact   FIM  is  crucial  to  help  correct  cases  where  the  KFAC  approximation  is  too  crude.
This  correction  remains  relatively  cheap,  since  Eq.  (3.25)  only  requires  computing  a  couple  of
matrix-vector  calculations.
    Last    but    not    least,    the    original    derivation    of    KFAC    describes    a    particular    Tikhonov
regularisation  in  order  to  stabilise  the  overall  algorithm  [30].  Such  a  regularisation  is  of  critical
importance,  since  it  limits  how  large  the  update  in  the  parameters  can  be.  If  the  trust  region  is
too  small,  the  beneﬁts  of  using  a  second-order  optimiser  will  be  null.  If  the  trust  region  is  too
large,  instabilities  will  kick  in  and  ruin  any  chances  of  reaching  convergence.
    The  KFAC  FIM  is  used  to  estimate  the  direction  of  the  update,  while  the  exact  FIM  is  used
to  evaluate  an  optimal  rescaling  of  the  direction.  Consequently,  two  distinct  trust  regions  are
considered,   which   reﬂect   the   diﬀerent   level   of   trust   one   has   in   the   direction,       ∆KFACn              ,   and   the
rescaling   factor,   ³∗.   Those   are   implemented   by   introducing   two   damping   factors,   µn   and   ¼n,
which  regularise    ˘FKFAC(¹n)  and  F (¹n),  respectively.  More  explicitly,  the  regularised  matrices
are  obtained  from  the  substitutions
      ˘F (l)                (          [                                         )      (          [                             )
        KFAC(¹n) →             Epθ   n   a(l−1)a(l−1)T]          +  Ã(l)µn   I      ¹     Epθ   n   e(l)e(l)T]      +    µn          ,           (3.26a)
                                                                                                                        Ã(l)    I
              F (¹n) → F (¹n)  +  ¼n   I   ,                                                                                                                                                                                  (3.26b)

where  Ã(l)   is  a  factor  that  is  automatically  adjusted  to  minimise  the  cross-term  obtained  when
expanding  the  Kronecker  product  [30].  In  practice,  the  damping  factors  are  dynamically  adapted
every  T   epochs.
    While   we   try   to   be   as   close   to   the   original   KFAC   algorithm   as   possible,   our   numerical
implementation   for   the   NQS   toy   model   slightly   diﬀers   in   the   dynamical   adjustment   of   the
damping  factors.  The  damping  factor  ¼n   is  adapted  following  a  Levenberg-Marquardt  rule  [58],
namely           
                                                 Än  < 0.25,                             ¼n+1  =   λ    nω    1
                                              0.25 f Än  f 0.75,       ¼n+1  = ¼n                     .                                                                           (3.27)
                                                 Än  > 0.75,                             ¼n+1  = É1   ¼n

The  reduction  ratio,

                                              Än  ≡         E(    ¹n  +  ¶KFACn  )     −  E(¹n)
                                                       M NGDn  (    ¶KFACn  )     −  M NGDn            (0)   ,                                                                            (3.28)

measures  the  discrepancy  between  the  actual  variation  of  the  loss  (numerator)  and  the  anticipated
one   from   the   quadratic   model   (denominator).   Unlike   in   the   original   KFAC   implementation,
however,   we   also   account   for   ﬂuctuation   on   the   energy   estimation   by   introducing   a   tolerance
on   increasing   the   energy,   i.e.   if   E(¹) f E(¹  +  ¶) f E(¹)  +  ϵ,   we   default   to   the   case   where   the
damping   ¼n    is   reduced.   In   all   our   calculations   ϵ   is   set   to   10%   of   E(¹).   The   damping   µn    is
adapted   with   a   greedy   algorithm   by   testing   which   damping   among   (µn, É2   µn,   γ   nω    2 )   leads   to
the  best  update.  For  all  the  calculations  performed  in  this  work,  we  set  T  = 5,  É1  = (19/20)T ,
É2  =√      19/20T    and  the  initial  damping  values  are  set  to  ¼0  = 103   and  µ0  = √103.  For  clarity,  we
provide  a  schematic  overview  of  the  KFAC  algorithm  in  Fig.                                2.  For  more  details,  we  refer  the
reader  to  Ref.  [30].
                     KFAC                          F              » reg
                                                                                              δn                                                    11
                      E(θ), rθE(θ)        ˘FKFAC   ³ reg∆  KFAC         α , µ        α ∆  KFAC                  Ψ  θ
                                                          n                              n        + µδn−  1

                     QN-KFAC
                                                  HQ              » reg
                                                                                              δn
                      E(θ), rθE(θ)        ˘FKFAC   ³ reg∆  KFAC         α , µ        α ∆  KFAC                  Ψ  θ
                                                          n                              n        + µδn−  1

                     QN-MR-KFAC
                                                       HQ                   » reg
                                                                      ES                          δn

                      E(θ), rθE(θ)       ˘FKFAC   ³ reg∆  KFAC  MINR∆  Mn       α , µ     α ∆  Mn  + µδn−  1     Ψ  θ
                                                        n
                     NGD                           F                » reg

                                                             ES                                δn

                      E(θ), rθE(θ)          ˘F    » reg MINR   ∆  Mn      α , µ        α ∆  Mn  + µδn−  1        Ψ  θ

                     DGD                        GVMC                » reg
                                                             ES                                δn

                      E(θ), rθE(θ)        ˘GVMC   » reg MINR   ∆  Mn      α , µ        α ∆  Mn  + µδn−  1        Ψ  θ



Figure  2:  Schematic  view  of  the  algorithms  associated  to  the  optimisers  discussed  in  this  work.


(d)   Improving  the  scaling  estimation

In   its   inception,   the   KFAC   optimiser   was   tested   on   several   deep   autoencoder   optimisation
problems  with  standard  datasets  (MNIST,  CURVES  and  FACES),  which  are  commonly  used  to
benchmark  NN  optimisation  methods  [59,60].  All  those  cases  fall  in  the  category  of  supervised
learning  for  standard  feed-forward  NNs.  Beyond  such  standard  cases,  the  original  KFAC  optimiser
has  to  be  adapted.  For  instance,  if  convolution  layers  are  a  part  of  the  NN  architecture,  Refs.  [31,61]
suggested   modiﬁcations   to   the   KFAC   approximation   of   the   FIM.   In   the   case   of   VMC   with
NQS,   several   attempts   have   been   put   forward   to   exploit   the   beneﬁts   of   KFAC   [                   3,33,62].   To
bypass   instabilities   encountered   when   applying   the   standard   KFAC   optimiser,   several   ad   hoc
adjustments  have  been  implemented  to  rectify  the  update  on  the  parameters  [3].  In  particular,
Ref.  [3]  describes  the  use  of  a  scheduled  learning  rate,  a  constant  damping,  a  norm  constraint
and  the  discarding  of  any  momentum  in  the  parameter  updates.  Those  adjustments  are  meant  to
replace  the  rescaling  phase  using  the  exact  FIM  and  the  dynamically  adjusted  damping  parameters
advocated   in   Ref.   [30].   Apart   from   the   lack   of   theoretical   motivation   for   such   adjustments,   it
is   consistently   reported   within   the   literature   that   heuristics   and   ﬁne-tuning   are   required   to
obtain  good  performance  [3,33,62].  In  this  section,  we  advocate  for  a  diﬀerent  approach,  which
avoids  any  such  heuristic  adjustment  of  hyperparameters,  while  remaining  close  to  the  original
philosophy  of  Ref.  [30].  We  start  by  providing  an  overview  of  the  performance  associated  to  our
implementation  of  KFAC  for  the  toy  model  described  in  Sec.                      2,  before  suggesting  improvements
to  the  rescaling  part  of  the  algorithm.
    To  compare  the  performance  of  the  diﬀerent  optimisers,  we  show  the  evolution  of  the  energy  as
a  function  of  the  number  of  epochs  in  the  panels  of  Fig.            3.  From  top  to  bottom,  the  diﬀerent  rows
correspond  to  increasing  number  of  particles,  from  A = 2  in  the  top  to  A = 6  in  the  bottom  row.
From  left  to  right,  the  results  scan  the  interaction  strength  in  a  range  V0  ∈ { −20, −10, 0, 10, 20 }.
Dashed   lines   provide   an   indication   of   the   expected   results   for   the   HF   approximation   and   for
the  CI  case.  The  optimisation  process  in  all  cases  is  stopped  after  1000  epochs.  Very  few  runs                                               12
reach  this  ﬁnal  number  and  most  lead  to  numerically  unstable  results  much  earlier  than  that.
As  in  previous  KFAC  implementations  [3,33,62],  we  conﬁrm  that  the  performance  of  the  KFAC
optimiser   is   indeed   ﬂuctuating.   In   many   cases,   the   energy   decreases   steadily   within   the   ﬁrst
50   to   100   epochs,   only   to   become   extremely   erratic   after   that   point.   None   of   the   KFAC   runs
manage  to  converge  to  the  benchmark  values,  regardless  of  the  number  of  particles  and  of  the
strength   of   the   interaction.   We   take   this   as   a   conﬁrmation   that   the   KFAC   algorithm,   in   its
original  formulation,  is  unﬁt  for  VMC  with  NQS.
    In  order  to  restore  the  validity  of  KFAC  in  VMC  calculations,  we  ﬁrst  focus  on  improving  the
rescaling   part   of   the   optimiser.   The   main   argument   put   forward   in   favour   of   using   M NGDn              in
the  rescaling  phase  is  that  the  FIM  can  be  interpreted  as  an  approximation  to  the  Hessian  of
the  loss  function  [30,32].  However,  as  emphasised  in  Refs.  [30,32],  the  validity  of  this  argument
relies  critically  on  the  assumption  that  one  is  trying  to  solve  a  supervised   learning   problem.  In
this  case,  the  loss  function  quantiﬁes  how  far  the  probability  distribution     pθ  ,  modelled  by  the
NN,   is   from   the   target   distribution,   q.   An   example   of   such   loss   function   is   the   cross-entropy,
given  in  Eq.  (3.10).  In  VMC,  however,  one  is  solving  a  reinforcement   learning   problem,  which
is   fundamentally   diﬀerent.   In   this   case,   the   loss   function   we   use   is   the   energy      E(¹)   which
characterises  the  quality  of  the  NQS  independently  of  the  knowledge  of  the  target  wave  function.
As   a   consequence,   the   underlying   rationale   justifying   the   use   of   the   FIM   as   an   approximate
Hessian  of  the  loss  function  is  lost.
    To  mitigate  this  issue,  we  replace  the  exact  FIM  used  in  the  rescaling  phase  by  a  quasi-Hessian
matrix,  HQ(¹),  whose  role  is  to  provide  a  better  quadratic  model  than  M NGDn            ,  namely




                                     M QNn       (¶) ≡  12 ¶THQ(¹n)¶  +  ∇E(¹n)T¶  +  E(¹n)  .                                                           (3.29)




Let  us  emphasise  that  we  still  use  the  KFAC  FIM  in  the  estimation  of  the  direction  as  in  KFAC.
Throughout   this   work,   we   will   refer   to   the   resulting   optimisation   algorithm   as   quasi-Newton
KFAC  (QN-KFAC),  and  we  employ  the  superscript  QN  in  the  corresponding  quantities.
    The  remaining  question  consists  in  deﬁning  which  quasi-Hessian  matrix    HQ(¹)  to  use.  In  the
case  of  supervised  learning,  the  performance  of  NGD  has  been  connected  to  the  similarity  between
the  FIM  F (¹)  and  the  Generalised-Gauss-Newton  (GGN)  matrix  G(¹)  [32].  In  particular,  it  has
been  shown  in  Refs.  [63,64]  that  for  several  standard  loss  functions  (squared  error,  cross-entropy,
softmax,  etc)  we  have  F (¹) = G(¹).  This  is  crucial  since  the  GGN  matrix  is  obtained  by  neglecting
the   Hessian   of   the   output   of   the   NN   in   the   calculation   of   the   Hessian   of   the   loss   function   so
that  the  FIM  can  be  interpreted  as  an  approximation  of  the  Hessian  of  the  cost  function  [32].
Therefore,  to  improve  the  rescaling  phase  of  the  algorithm,  we  follow  a  similar  path  and  deﬁne
the  quasi-Hessian  HQ(¹)  to  be  the  matrix  obtained  from  the  Hessian  of  the  energy  E(¹),  after
neglecting  the  Hessian  of  ln |Ψθ  |.  More  speciﬁcally,  the  Hessian  of  the  energy  reads  [                             65]



 ∂θ   i ∂θ   j E(¹) = 2EX ∼pθ      [(       EL,θ    (X )  −  E(¹))       ×(    ∂θ   i ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ[   ∂θ   i ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])]

                      +  2EX ∼pθ      [(       ∂θ   i EL,θ    (X )  − EX ∼pθ[   ∂θ   i EL,θ    (X )])

                                         ×(    ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])]

                      +  4EX ∼pθ      [(       EL,θ    (X )  −  E(¹))

                                         ×(    ∂θ   i  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   i  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])

                                         ×(    ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])]              .                                                    (3.30)
                                                                                                                                                                13






























Figure   3:   Evolution   of   the   energy   E(¹)   as   a   function   of   the   number   of   epochs   for   the   KFAC
(purple  solid  line)  and  for  the  QN-KFAC  (green  solid  line)  optimisers.  The  corresponding  shaded
area  represents  the  standard  deviation  of  the  Monte  Carlo  energy  estimate.  From  top  to  bottom,
the  panels  correspond  to  results  for  A = 2,  3,  4,  5  and  6  particles,  respectively.  From  left  to  right,
V0   goes  from  −20  to  20  in  increments  of  10  units.  HF  and  CI  results  are  displayed  for  reference,
with  horizontal  green  and  orange  dashed  lines.  CI  results  are  displayed  for  A f 5  and  V0  g −10
where  we  have  access  to  converged  results  [7].



After  setting  ∂θ   i ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  to  zero,  the  induced  quasi-Hessian  reads
      HQ(¹)θ   i θ   j  = 2EX ∼pθ       [(       ∂θ   i EL,θ    (X )  − EX ∼pθ[   ∂θ   i EL,θ    (X )])

                                           ×(    ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])]

                          +  4EX ∼pθ       [(       EL,θ    (X )  −  E(¹))       ×(    ∂θ   i  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ[   ∂θ   i  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])

                                              ×(    ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|  − EX ∼pθ     [   ∂θ   j  ln |Ψθ  (X )|])]              .                                             (3.31)


In   practice,   to   reduce   the   statistical   noise   of   the   estimator   of   the   quasi-Hessian   we   use   the
symmetrised  estimator  introduced  in  Ref.  [66].  A  key  advantage  of  using  a  quasi-Hessian  over  the
full  Hessian  comes  from  its  structure  as  a  statistical  average  of  outer  products.  This  structure
allows  to  conserve  a  numerical  complexity  linear  in  the  number  of  parameters  of  the  NQS,  like
for   the   FIM   [67].   However,   a   critical   drawback   is   that   the   HQ(¹)   is   not   in   general   positive
semi-deﬁnite,  which  can  lead  to  instabilities  if  the  damping    ¼n   is  not  large  enough.  In  addition,
the  formula  given  in  Eq.  (3.31)  requires  computing  third-order  derivatives  of  the  wave  function.
These   arise   from   the   second-order   derivatives   with   respect   to   the   input   in   the   kinetic   energy
term  of  the  local  energy,  and  the  derivatives  with  respect  to  the  parameters.  These  derivatives
should  be  handled  with  care  in  order  to  avoid  numerical  instabilities  [3].  A  schematic  overview  of
the  QN-KFAC  algorithm  is  provided  in  Fig.                       2.
    We  now  proceed  to  compare  the  VMC  energy  evolution  employing  QN-KFAC  and  KFAC.  We                                                 14
stress  that  we  perform  systematic  calculations  with  all  hyperparameters  of  the  two  optimisers
kept  ﬁxed  to  the  aforementioned  values  (see  also  the  Supplemental  Material).  This  minimises
the  diﬀerences  in  the  optimisation  scheme  and  provides  a  general  overview  in  diﬀerent  physical
conditions.   We   observe   that   QN-KFAC   (green   lines)   leads   to   a   dramatic   increase   in   overall
stability.  We  ﬁnd  that  for  a  small  number  of  particles,    A f 3,  QN-KFAC  almost  always  manages
to  converge  to  reasonable  values.  For  larger  particle  numbers,  the  convergence  pattern  is  more
erratic.   In   some   cases,   we   notice   strong   oscillations.   In   others,   we   observe   jumps   in   energy
predictions.  The  best-behaved  convergence  patterns  are  found  for  V0  = 0  and  V0  = −10.  While
this   improvement   is   encouraging,   we   also   notice   that,   even   in   the   best   cases,   the   late   stage
convergence   can   be   slow.   For   instance,   if   we   focus   on   the   second   column,   corresponding   to
V0  = −10,  we  observe  that,  after  a  quick  convergence  during  the  ﬁrst    100  epochs,  the  QN-KFAC
optimiser   seems   to   struggle   to   converge   fully   before   reaching   our   stopping   criterion   of   1000
epochs.  Comparing  QN-KFAC  with  CI  in  the  A = 2  case  (top  panel),  it  is  clear  that  QN-KFAC
converged  to  the  exact  result.  However,  for  A = 6  particles  and  the  same  interaction  strength,
in   the   absence   of   exact   CI   benchmarks,   it   is   not   clear   whether   or   not   the   QN-KFAC   ﬁnished
converging.
    The   QN-KFAC   optimiser   provides   a   ﬁrst   improvement   over   KFAC   in   our   NQS   toy   model
simulations.  This  was  achieved  by  modifying  the  quadratic  model  used  in  the  rescaling  phase  of
the  KFAC  algorithm.  In  order  to  tackle  the  remaining  issues  observed  when  testing  QN-KFAC,
like  the  presence  of  strong  oscillations  in  some  cases  and  the  slow  convergence  pattern  in  the  late
stage  of  the  optimisation  process,  we  now  proceed  to  improve  on  the  direction  estimation  phase
of  the  optimiser.



(e)   Improving  the  direction  estimation

The   original   KFAC   algorithm   was   developed   for   supervised   learning   problems   with   standard
feed-forward   NNs.   In   the   case   of   a   reinforcement   learning   problem   like   VMC,   the   theoretical
motivation  for  using  the  FIM  is  lost.  This  prompted  the  changes  in  the  rescaling  phase  of  the
optimiser,   as   discussed   in   the   previous   subsection.   In   this   subsection,   we   further   argue   that
using  an  NQS  architecture  additionally  breaks  the  original  rationale  motivating  the  Kronecker
factorisation,  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  KFAC  algorithm  [30].
    As  mentioned  in  section         (c),  the  direction  of  the  update  in  the  parameters  ¶KFACn                 is  obtained
based  on  two  approximations  of  the  complete  FIM:  (i)  the  FIM  is  assumed  to  be  block-diagonal
in  the  layers  and  (ii)  each  block  is  further  approximated  by  exchanging  the  Kronecker  product
and  the  statistical  average,  thus  replacing  Eq.  (3.22)  by  Eq.  (3.23).  The  latter  approximation  is
discussed  at  length  in  the  original  derivation  of  KFAC  in  Ref.  [30].  The  validity  of  Eq.  (3.22),
however,  is  unclear.  The  chain  rule  used  to  derive  it  relies  on  the  speciﬁc  NN  architecture.  In  the
case  of  a  standard  feed-forward  NN,  Eq.  (3.22)  does  hold.  However,  it  breaks  down  for  other  types
of  NN.  For  example,  this  is  the  case  for  convolution  layers  where  the  original  KFAC  algorithm
had  to  be  adapted  [31].
    In  the  case  of  NQS  for  fermionic  systems,  permutation-equivariant  layers  also  break  Eq.  (3.22).
To  understand  why,  let  us  consider  the  lth   permutation-equivariant  layer  with  a  shared  weight
matrix  W (l)  ∈ RH ×H   with  input  f (l−1)  ∈ RA×H   and  output  h(l)  ∈ RA×H ,  related  through  the(
activation  function  h(l)  = tanh            f (l−1)W (l)T)      .  Using  the  chain  rule,  the  derivatives  in  the  FIM
for  a  fermionic  NN  now  read


                       A∑                            A∑                        ( ∑                      )
       ∂  ln pθ   =          ∂h(l)mi  ∂  ln pθ  =         f (l−1)                       f (l−1)            ×   ∂  ln pθ   .               (3.32)
       ∂W (l)               ∂W (l)    ∂h(l)                mj          ×  tanh′          mk       W (l)ik       ∂h(l)
             ij      m=1         ij       mi       m=1                              k                               mi
In  this  case,  the  forward  activities  a(l−1)   and  backward  sensitivities  e(l)   are  not  row  vectors,  but                                           15
rather  matrices

                                        a(l−1)mj         ≡ f (l−1)mj          ,                                                                                                                                                     (3.33a)
                                                              ( ∑                        )
                                           e(l)mi  ≡ tanh′              f (l−1)mk       W (l)ki×   ∂  ln pθ  .                                                            (3.33b)
                                                                   k                              ∂h(l)mi

With  this,  we  recover  formally  the  same  result  as  Eq.  (3.21),
                                                     (      ∂  ln pθ)         (
                                               vec      ∂W (l)       = vec      e(l)a(l−1)T)         .                                                                               (3.34)

However,   because   the   forward   activities   and   backward   sensitivities   are   now   matrices,   we   no(
longer   ﬁnd   a   Kronecker   product   structure   for   the   partial   derivatives,   i.e.     vec                         e(l)a(l−1)T)        ̸=
a(l−1)  ¹  e(l).  Instead,  the  lth   block  of  the  FIM  in  vectorised  form  now  reads
                                        [       (      ∂  ln pθ)      (      ∂  ln pθ)     T]
                    ˘F (l)(¹) = Epθ       vec                   vec
                                                   ∂W (l)                ∂W (l)
                                        [       (                          (
                              = Epθ       vec     e(l)a(l−1)T)        vec     e(l)a(l−1)T)     T]
                                        [ (
                              = Epθ          a(l−1)  ¹  e(l))(       vec (IA) vec (IA)T)(             a(l−1)  ¹  e(l))     T]    ,                     (3.35)

where    IA    is    the    A  ×  A    identity    matrix.    In    this    result,    we    have    used    the    general    formula
vec (BC D) = (DT  ¹  B)vec (C )  [68],  which  holds  for  any  matrices  B,  C   and  D   with  compatible
matrix  products.  Comparing  Eq.  (3.22)  to  Eq.  (3.35),  one  sees  that  the  weight-sharing  introduces
an  intermediate  A2  ×  A2   factor,  vec (IA) vec (IA)T,  which  prevents  us  from  recasting  the  FIM  as
the  average  of  a  Kronecker  product.  More  generally,  as  soon  as  a  parameter  of  the  NN  contributes
to  more  than  one  hidden  node,  one  must  use  the  chain  rule  as  given  in  Eq.  (3.32)  and  Eq.  (3.22)
does  not  hold  any  more.
    Interestingly,  this  analysis  suggests  that  the  KFAC  rationale  remains  valid  for  the  A = 1  case,
i.e.  for  the  particular  case  of  one  particle.  We  expect  that  it  will  become  less  and  less  valid  as  A
increases.  This  seems  to  support  our  empirical  observation  that  QN-KFAC  performs  better  for
small  values  of  A.  The  results  obtained  with  QN-KFAC  in  Fig.                               3  look  indeed  more  stable,  and
converge  faster,  for  A = 2  and  3  than  for  A g 4.
    Following  Eq.  (3.6),  to  perform  the  parameter  update  we  have  to  solve  the  linear  system
                                                (     ˘F (¹n)  +  ¼nI)     ∆M
                                                                            n     = −∇E(¹n)  .                                                                                 (3.36)

To   do   so,   we   employ   the   iterative   linear   solver   MINRES   with   a   maximum   number   of   steps
NMR,  which  we  initialise  at  the  direction  obtained  in  KFAC.  This  allows  us  to  systematically
improve  on  the  direction  estimation.  We  dub  the  resulting  optimiser  QN-MR-KFAC.  We  note
that  when  NMR  = 0,  QN-MR-KFAC  reduces  to  QN-KFAC.  Let  us  also  emphasise  that,  while
the  quasi-Hessian  HQ(¹)  is  used  in  the  rescaling  phase,  only  the  FIM  is  used  in  the  evaluation  of
the  direction  of  the  update.  For  clarity,  we  provide  a  schematic  overview  of  the  QN-MR-KFAC
algorithm   in   Fig.       2.   More   details   about   our   implementation   of   MINRES   can   be   found   in   the
Supplemental  Material.
    We  now  test  the  impact  of  using  a  reﬁned  directional  update,    ∆Mn   ,  instead  of  the  bare  KFAC
estimate,  ∆KFACn              .  We  focus  ﬁrst  on  cases  where  QN-KFAC  converges  reasonably  well  without
violent  oscillations.  We  show  the  energy  as  a  function  of  the  epoch  number  for  V0  = −10  with
A = 2  (top  left  panel)  and  A = 4  (bottom  left  panel)  particles  in  Fig.                          4.  Speciﬁcally,  we  illustrate
the   impact   of   MINRES   by   exploring   a   diﬀerent   set   of   iterations,     NMR  ∈ { 0, 1, 5, 25, 50 }.   To
illustrate  how  the  picture  evolves  as  A  increases,  we  also  show  snapshots  of  energies  for  epochs
                                                                                                                                                       16
































Figure  4:  Evolution  of  the  energy  E(¹)  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  epochs  for  QN-MR-KFAC
optimisations   with   NMR  = 0, 1, 5, 25, 50.   The   top   (bottom)   left   panels   shows   results   for   A = 2
(A = 4)  for  V0  = −10.  HF  and  CI  benchmarks  are  displayed  for  reference  with  green  and  orange
dashed   lines,   respectively.   Since   we   do   not   have   access   to   converged   CI   result   in   all   cases,   we
also  display  for  reference  results  obtained  in  Ref.  [7]  with  blue  dotted  lines  and  referred  to  as
Eg.  s.  .  The  top  (bottom)  right  panels  show  results  for  A = 2, 3, 4, 5  and  6  with  epochs  between
200  and  300  (900  and  1000).



between   200   and   300   (top   right   panel)   and   for   epochs   between   900   and   1000   (bottom   right
panel).
    The    results    clearly    indicate    that    improving    the    direction    of    the    parameter    update    (or
increasing    NMR)    has    two    key    eﬀects.    First,    the    oscillations    in    the    energy    estimate    during
the  minimisation  process  are  substantially  reduced.  Even  for  A = 2  (top  left  panel),  where  the
oscillations  were  relatively  small,  increasing  NMR   leads  to  substantially  reduced  oscillations  in
the   energy   predictions.   For   4   particles   (bottom   left   panel),   QN-KFAC,   which   corresponds   to
the   NMR  = 0   line,   has   relatively   large   oscillations   in   energy,   of   order   0.1   in   HO   units.   When
NMR    increases   to   5,   the   oscillations   are   reduced   by   about   a   factor   of   2.   A   further   increase
up   to   NMR  = 50   shows   minor   oscillations,   to   less   than   about   0.03   in   HO   units.   Second,   the
convergence  in  the  late  stages  of  the  optimisation  is  considerably  faster.  For  A = 2,  QN-KFAC
only  converges  to  the  CI  result  at  around  the  1000th   epoch.  When  the  MINRES  solver  performs
more   than   25   iterations   per   epoch,   the   optimisation   process   reaches   the   CI   value   in   ≈ 120
iterations.  In  the  4-particle  case,  the  improvement  is  more  dramatic.  QN-KFAC  plateaus,  but
does  not  converge,  at  the  1000th   epoch.  Increasing  NMR,  a  more  transparent  convergence  pattern
appears  and,  for  NMR  = 50,  about  400  epochs  are  enough  to  reach  the  minimum.  We  stress  that
the  characteristically  slow  approach  to  the  minimum  was  a  major  drawback  of  the  QN-KFAC
proposal.
                                                                                                                                                    17






























Figure  5:  The  same  as  Fig.         3,  but  comparing  the  QN-KFAC  optimiser  (green  solid  line)  to  the
QN-MR-KFAC  optimiser  with  NMR  = 50  (orange  solid  line).




    Overall,   we   observe   that   improving   the   quality   of   the   direction   of   ¶n   substantially   impact
the  performances.  Comparing  the  A = 2  and  A = 4  cases,  we  see  that  the  number  of  MINRES
iterations  necessary  to  reach  optimal  convergence  is  larger  as  A  increases.  This  is  further  supported
by   the   top   right   and   top   left   panels   of   Fig.   4   which   illustrate   that,   both   in   the   early   and   late
stages   of   the   optimisation,   the   number   of   MINRES   iterations   necessary   to   reach   an   optimal
convergence  increases  with  A.  This  conﬁrms  our  previous  theoretical  analysis  expecting  KFAC
to  be  less  and  less  well  motivated  as  A  increases.  In  practice,  we  ﬁnd  that  setting     NMR  = 50  is
suﬃcient  for  any  case  where  a  stable  convergence  is  reached.
    A   more   systematic   analysis   of   the   importance   of   the   improvement   in   the   direction   of   the
updates   is   provided   in   Fig.       5.   Here,   we   show   the   same   results   as   in   Fig.         3,   but   comparing
QN-KFAC  to  QN-MR-KFAC  with  NMR  = 50.  The  results  conﬁrm  that  QN-MR-KFAC  greatly
improves  on  both  the  oscillations  of  the  energy  values  and  the  late  phase  of  convergence.  In  the
vast  majority  of  cases,  QN-MR-KFAC  performs  better  than  QN-KFAC  in  terms  of  accuracy  and
speed  of  convergence.  Concerning  the  stability  of  the  optimisation  process,  the  improvements  are
more  marginal.  The  attractive  and  non-interacting  cases  (columns  to  the  left  of,  and  including,
the   centre)   only   show   some   erratic   peaks   in   energy   in   a   few,   selected   cases.   In   contrast,   the
repulsive  cases  are  still  prone  to  important  oscillations  as  soon  as  A g 4.
    Finally,  we  notice  that  in  several  cases  (for  example  when  A = 2,  V0  = 10  and  A = 5,  V0  = −10)
QN-MR-KFAC  shows  instabilities  even  after   having  converged.  We  interpret  this  behaviour  in
terms  of  the  dynamically  adjusted  damping.  Once  convergence  is  reached,  the  trust  region  keeps
increasing.  One  may  eventually  hit  a  remote  spurious  point  in  the  local  quadratic  model  which  has
a  value  that  is  lower  than  the  true  ground-state  energy  and  jump  there.  The  associated  numerical
instability   takes   a   few   epochs   to   self-adjust.   As   stated   before,   this   is   one   of   the   drawbacks   of
using  a  quasi-Hessian,  HQ(¹),  which  is  not  positive  semi-deﬁnite.  These  pathological  cases  may
in  principle  be  cured  by  introducing  a  minimum  value  on  the  damping,  ¼n.  More  generally,  most                                         18
of   the   ﬂuctuations   encountered   so   far   can   be   tackled   by   being   more   restrictive   on   the   trust
regions.  However,  in  doing  so,  we  also  restrict  the  size  of  the  updates  and  slow  down  the  overall
convergence  of  the  optimiser.  We  also  introduce  the  risk  of  an  artiﬁcial  convergence,  in  the  sense
that  the  energy  may  converge  only  because  the  trust  region  has  shrunk  to  a  very  narrow  point.
We  leave  further  analysis  of  trust  regions  and  their  dynamical  adjustments  for  future  work.

4.   Decisional  gradient  descent
(a)   Failure  of  information  geometry

Despite  the  multiple  improvements  to  the  original  KFAC  algorithm  which  we  designed  to  take  into
account  the  particularities  of  VMC  and  NQS,  our  ﬁnest  optimiser,  QN-MR-KFAC,  is  still  subject
to  violent  ﬂuctuations  in  the  energy.  As  discussed  in  Sec.                   (e),  this  could  be  tackled  by  further
reﬁning   the   trust   regions.   Doing   so,   however,   may   limit   the   original   promise   of   performance
or   require   ﬁne-tuning   of   the   hyperparameters,   as   in   past   attempts   to   adapt   KFAC   to   VMC
with   NQS   [3,33].   These   attempts,   including   ours,   rely   on   the   use   of   the   FIM,   F ,   to   estimate
the  direction  of  the  updates  ∆n.  The  use  of  the  FIM  was  originally  motivated  by  its  connection
to   the   Hessian   of   the   loss   function   in   a   supervised   learning   setting.   We   have   already   argued
that   standard   VMC-NQS   does   not   fall   in   the   category   of   supervised   learning   problems,   and
hence  using  the  FIM  (or  its  corresponding  approximations)  is  no  longer  justiﬁed.  The  substantial
improvement  observed  in  Fig.              3,  where  the  quasi-Hessian  HQ   is  used  in  the  rescaling  phase  of
the  optimiser  instead  of  the  exact  FIM  F ,  further  supports  this  idea.  We  hypothesise  that,  the
failure  of  KFAC  are  not  only  due  to  the  approximations  it  makes  to  NGD,  but  also,  at  a  more
fundamental  level,  to  the  failure  of  the  plain  NGD  to  provide  a  good  optimiser  for  VMC  when
applied  to  the  many-body  systems  we  consider.
    To  test  this  hypothesis,  we  perform  calculations  with  an  optimiser  that  is  similar  to  QN-MR-
KFAC  with  NMR  = 50,  except  that  the  exact  FIM,  F ,  as  opposed  to  the  quasi-Hessian,  HQ,  is
used  in  the  rescaling  phase.  This  is  closer  in  spirit  to  Hessian-free  optimisers  [69].  In  addition,
to  avoid  any  contamination  from  KFAC,  we  replace  the  initial  guess  in  the  MINRES  solver  by
the   previous   update,   rescaled   by   a   prefactor   ·  = 0.95,   i.e.   the   starting   point   of   the   MINRES
solver  is  now  ·  ×  ¶n−1   instead  of  ∆KFACn              .  This  follows  the  default  recommendation  of  Ref.  [69]
for  Hessian-free  optimisers.  All  other  hyperparameters  are  ﬁxed  to  the  same  value  used  in  our
previous  QN-MR-KFAC  calculations.  Although  we  do  not  calculate  exactly  the  natural  gradient
update,  ¶NGDn             given  in  Eq.  (3.17),  we  deem  this  to  be  suﬃciently  close  to  the  NGD  approach.  In
consequence,  we  will  refer  to  this  optimiser  as  NGD.  A  schematic  overview  of  our  implementation
of  NGD  is  provided  in  Fig.         2.
    We   present   the   results   of   this   NGD   optimiser   in   Fig.             6.   The   panels   are   organised   in   the
same   fashion   as   Fig.     3.   In   all   the   cases   considered,   NGD   fails   to   converge   smoothly   to   a   ﬁnal
value.   We   ﬁnd   strong   oscillations,   akin   to   those   observed   for   KFAC   in   Fig.                3.   In   some   cases,
particularly  in  the  attractive  regime  (columns  to  the  left  of  the  centre),  the  optimiser  seems  to
get  stuck  around  the  HF  solution.  Even  then,  violent  oscillations  arise  in  the  energy  minimisation
process.   The   generic   failure   of   the   NGD   optimiser   across   diﬀerent   numbers   of   particles   and
interaction   strengths   further   supports   our   hypothesis   that   NGD   does   not   fall   in   the   category
of   second-order   optimisers   for   VMC.   As   discussed   in   Sec.                (b),   NGD   can   be   seen   as   a   simple
gradient  descent  where  the  deﬁnition  of  trust  regions  are  based  on  information  geometry,  i.e.,  on
the  KL  divergence  (3.11).  We  interpret  the  failure  of  NGD  as  a  consequence  of  the  unsuitability
of  information  geometry  for  VMC.
    This  raises  the  question:  which  geometry  should  one  use  for  VMC?  Ideally,  we  would  like  to
use  a  geometry  leading  to  (i)  a  local  metric  that  is  positive  semi-deﬁnite,  for  stability  purposes;
and  (ii)  a  metric  informed  by  the  loss  function  that  we  are  trying  to  minimise,  here  the  energy
E(¹).  While  both  conditions  are  satisﬁed  when  considering  information  geometry  for  supervised
                                                                                                                                                                     19






























Figure  6:  The  same  as  Fig.               3,  but  comparing  the  NGD  optimiser  (dark  blue  solid  line)  to  the
DGD  optimiser  (red  solid  line)  with  NMR  = 50.



learning  problems,  condition  (ii)  is  violated  in  the  case  of  VMC  simulations.  In  order  to  restore
condition  (ii),  we  now  introduce  the  concept  of  decision  geometry.

(b)   Decision  geometry

Our  starting  point  consists  in  reformulating  VMC  in  a  game-theory  framework.  In  this  paradigm,
the  standard  information  geometry  is  generalised  by  the  concept  of  decision  geometry  [35,37,70,71].
    Similarly  to  how  the  KL  divergence,  Eq.  (3.11),  is  related  to  the  cross-entropy  loss,  Eq.  (3.10),
one  can  deﬁne  a  divergence  function  associated  to     any   loss  function  L(¹)  of  the  type

                                                      L(¹) ≡ −EX ∼pθ    [S (X, pθ  )]    ,                                                                                              (4.1)

so  long  as  S (X, pθ  )  is  a  so-called  proper   scoring   rule   [38].  A  scoring  rule  S (x, p)  is  any  integrable
function  that  takes  as  inputs  a  probability  distribution,  p,  and  a  sample,  x,  and  returns  a  real
valued  quantity.  From  any  scoring  rule,  one  deﬁnes  the  associated  expected  score    S(p, q)  for  any
two  probability  distributions  p  and  q   by

                                                        S(p, q) ≡ EX ∼p  [S (X, q)]    .                                                                                                 (4.2)

A  scoring  rule  is  said  to  be  proper  if  and  only  if,  for  any  two  probability  distributions  p  and  q,

                                                               S(p, p) f S(p, q)  .                                                                                                               (4.3)

In   this   framework,   several   typical   quantities   of   information   theory   can   be   generalised.   For
example,  the  generalised  entropy   and  the  generalised  cross-entropy   are  simply  S(p, p)  and  S(p, q),
respectively.  Their  associated  divergence  function,  DS ,  is  deﬁned  by                                                                                           20

                                                       DS (p, q) ≡ S(p, q)  −  S(p, p)  .                                                                                             (4.4)

The   new   geometry,   associated   to   DS ,   is   referred   to   as   a   decision   geometry   [37,71]   because   of
its  relation  with  statistical  decision  problems  [72].  Similarly  to  the  KL  divergence,  DS   deﬁnes  a
metric  locally.  This  is  obtained  by  Taylor-expanding  DS   at  second-order,  namely

                                              DS (pθ  ,    pθ  +δ  ) =  12 ¶TGS (¹)¶  +  O(    ¶3)       ,                                                                            (4.5)

where   GS (¹)   is   the   decision   metric   associated   to   S.   Let   us   emphasise   that,   by   construction,
GS (¹)  is  symmetric  positive  semi-deﬁnite.
     This    symmetric    and    positive    deﬁnite    decision    metric    provides    a    natural    starting    point
for   optimisation   schemes   that   are   not   tied   to   the   FIM.   In   this   context,   we   deﬁne   a   novel
optimiser,    the    decisional    gradient    descent     (DGD)    which    consists    simply    in    performing    a
gradient   descent   with   trust   regions   deﬁned   by   the   norm   associated   to   the   decision   metric,
T DGDn             = { ¶  : ¶TGS (¹n)¶  f r2  }    .  Here,  r  > 0  denotes  the  maximum  size  on  the  update  ¶n.  Just
like  for  NGD,  it  is  more  practical  to  work  with  an  equivalent  unconstrained  regularised  problem.
This  leads  to  the  deﬁnition  of  an  update,

                                                   ¶DGD-regn                       = −³  G−1S     (¹n)∇L(¹n)  ,                                                                                     (4.6)

where  ³  is  again  a  learning  rate  that  can  be  related  to  the  size  of  T DGDn            .
     If  we  choose  the  scoring  rule  S sup(X, pθ  ) ≡ − ln pθ  (X ),  the  decision  geometry  framework  is
such  that  one  recovers  exactly  the  standard  cross-entropy,  Eq.  (3.10),  and  the  KL  divergence,
Eq.   (3.11).   In   other   words,   DGD   reduces   to   NGD.   To   go   beyond   NGD,   we   move   away   from
the  standard  logarithmic  scoring  rule  and  choose  instead  an  alternative  one  based  on  the  local
energy,  namely

                                                        SVMC(X, pθ  ) ≡ −EL,θ    (X ),                                                                                               (4.7)

where  pθ   = |Ψθ  |2   is  the  Born  probability  associated  to  the  many-body  wave  function.  We  refer  to
this  scoring  rule  as  the  VMC   scoring   rule.  The  local  energy  in  our  toy  model  is  explicitly  given
in  Eq.  (2.4).  One  can  show  that,  for  such  local  energy,  the  inequality
                                          EX ∼pθ      [   −EL,θ    (X )]     f EX ∼pθ       [   −EL,θ      ′ (X )]                                                                          (4.8)

holds   for   probability   distributions   pθ     and   p′θ     in   P    [73].   The   class   P    contains   all   probability
distributions  that  are  smooth,  that  vanishes  fast  enough  to  inﬁnity  and  that  does  not  cancel  out
on  any  ﬁnite    X .  In  other  words,  SVMC   is  a  proper  scoring  rule  with  respect  to  P .  Generalisations
of  SVMC   to  make  it  proper  with  respect  to  any  physical  probability  distributions  is  left  for  future
work.  Following  the  analogy  with  information  geometry,  the  total  energy  E(¹),  computed  as  the
expectation  value  of  the  local  energy,  is  analogous  to  a  generalised  entropy

                                                          E(¹) = −SVMC(pθ  , pθ  )  ,                                                                                                    (4.9)

with  associated  divergence
                                      DVMC(pθ  , pθ   ′ ) = EX ∼pθ             [   EL,θ    (X )  −  EL,θ      ′ (X )]       .                                                        (4.10)

For   our   toy   model,   employing   continuous   variables   in   a   one-dimensional   setting   and   a   local
interaction  term,  Eq.(2.4),  this  diﬀerence  reduces  to  the  expectation  value

                                                          A∑               [   (∂xk  ln pθ  (X )  −  ∂xk  ln pθ   ′ (X ))2]       .                             (4.11)
                        DVMC(pθ  , pθ   ′ ) =  18              EX ∼pθ
                                                        k=1
This   divergence   arises   entirely   from   the   kinetic   term   of   the   Hamiltonian,   which   is   the   reason
derivatives  appear.  We  note  that  this  divergence  can  be  written  in  terms  of  ﬁrst-,  rather  than
second-order  derivatives,  because  we  assume  regularity  at  the  boundaries.  For  our  neural  network,
it  can  be  analytically  proven  that  the  boundary  terms  appearing  in  the  derivation  of  the  divergence
are   zero,   and   therefore   Eq.   (4.11)   holds.   However,   this   need   not   be   the   case   for   arbitrary   NN                            21
architectures  or  distributions.  A  more  detailed  derivation  of  this  expression  can  be  found  in  the
Supplemental  Material.
    As  can  be  seen  from  Eq.  (4.10),  the  decision  geometry  obtained  from  the  VMC  scoring  rule
deﬁned  in  Eq.     (4.7)  provides  a  connection  between  the  geometry  and  the  loss  function  we  aim
to   minimise,   E(¹).   Indeed,   the   divergence   we   obtain   can   be   seen   as   an   approximation   of   the
diﬀerence   of   energy     E(¹)  −  E(¹′),   where   we   would   have   neglected   re-weighting   the   samples.
The  metric,  GVMC(¹),  obtained  from  Taylor-expanding  the  divergence  thus  fulﬁls  the  two  main
theoretical  requirements  we  discussed  in  Sec.                    (a),  namely  (i)  the  metric  is  symmetric  positive
deﬁnite  and  (ii)  the  metric  is  informed  by  the  loss  function    E(¹)  we  aim  to  minimise.  The  metric
reads  explicitly

                                                   A∑              [   ∂θ   i ∂xk  ln pθ  (X )  ∂θ   j ∂xk  ln pθ  (X )]       ,                               (4.12)
                       GVMC(¹)θ   i θ   j  ≡  14        EX ∼pθ
                                                  k=1
and  we  will  use  it  later  on  in  simulations.  We  direct  the  interested  reader  to  the  Supplemental
Material  for  a  proof  for  this  expression.  A  peculiarity  of  this  equation  is  the  appearance  of  mixed
derivatives  with  respect  to  both  parameters  and  inputs  of  the  probability  distribution.  We  will
provide  more  details  on  the  DGD  optimiser  in  a  forthcoming  publication  [74].
    Interestingly,  using  the  natural  scoring  rule  of  Eq.  (4.7)  for  VMC  leads  to  a  geometry  that
is  equivalent  to  the  one  introduced  by  Hyvärinen  from  very  diﬀerent  initial  considerations  [                                  35,
75,76].   In   Ref.   [75],   the   main   concern   was   to   bypass   the   diﬃculty   of   sampling   according   to   a
non-normalised  probability  distribution.  The  so-called  Hyvärinen  score  has  the  following  form

                                                    A∑   [
                               SH(X, pθ  ) ≡              ∂ 2xk  ln pθ  (X )  +   12  (∂xk  ln pθ  (X ))2]     ,                                                 (4.13)
                                                   k=1
and   it   is   essentially   the   kinetic   part   of   the   local   energy,   Eq.   (2.4).   Our   VMC   score   is   related
to  the  Hyvärinen  score  through  the  formula  SVMC(X, pθ  ) =   14 SH(X, pθ  )  −  V  (X )  .   As  a  result,
the  associated  divergence  function  and  metric  are  proportional  to  each  other,  i.e.  their  decision
geometry  are  identical  up  to  a  scaling  factor.  In  the  language  of  game  theory,  the  Hyvärinen  and
VMC  scoring  rules  are  said  to  be  equivalent   [37,38].
(c)   Application  to  VMC

We  now  proceed  to  test  a  DGD-based  optimisation  strategy  on  VMC  calculations  with  NQS.  In
this  case,  one  uses  the  VMC  scoring  rule,  Eq.  (4.7),  which  deﬁnes  the  metric     GVMC.  Moreover,
the  loss  function  is  the  energy  of  the  system,  so  the  update  in  the  parameters  immediately  reads

                                             ¶DGD-regn                       = −³  G−1VMC(¹n)∇E(¹n)  .                                                                             (4.14)

In  order  to  provide  a  fair  comparison  with  NGD  and  the  associated  approximated  optimisers
(KFAC,  QN-KFAC  or  QN-MR-KFAC),  we  have  set  the  learning  rate  ³ = 1.  This  common  choice
is  critical  to  ensure  that  any  success  of  DGD  is  well  motivated  and  that  DGD  can  be  interpreted
as  a  second-order  optimiser.  In  this  case,  one  solves  the  sequence  of  quadratic  sub-problems

                                 M DGDn            (¶) =  12 ¶TGVMC(¹n)¶  +  ∇E(¹n)T¶  +  E(¹n)  .                                                   (4.15)

As  a  ﬁrst  implementation  of  DGD,  we  use  the  very  same  code  employed  in  our  NGD  optimiser.
The  diﬀerence  is  that  we  replace  the  FIM     F (¹n)  in  the  NGD,  by  the  decision  metric,  GVMC(¹n).
We  provide  a  schematic  overview  of  the  implementation  of  DGD  in  Fig.                            2  and  remind  the  reader
that  more  information  on  hyperparameters  can  be  found  in  the  Supplemental  Material.
    Results   for   the   NGD   and   DGD   optimisers   are   shown   hand   in   hand   in   Fig.                      6.   Clearly,   the
stability   of   the   optimisation   process   is   dramatically   improved   when   employing   DGD.   A   well-
deﬁned  initial  minimisation  occurs  for  the  ﬁrst       100  epochs  in  all  cases.  Importantly,  the  energy
minimum   is   usually   reached   within   this   ﬁrst     100   epochs.   No   strong   ﬂuctuations   are   observed
                                                                                                                                                22






























Figure  7:  The  same  as  Fig.       3,  but  comparing  the  DGD  optimiser  (red  line)  to  the  QN-MR-KFAC
optimiser  (orange  solid  line)  with  NMR  = 50.




in  the  energy  either  close  or  away  from  the  minimum.  Out  of  the  25  cases  presented  in  Fig.                          6,
only  three  extreme  cases  (i.e.  about  12%  of  the  minimisations)  fail  to  converge.  Explicitly,  these
cases  correspond  to  A = 5  particles  with  V0  = 20  and  A = 6  with  V0  = 10  and  with  V0  = 20.  In
the  ﬁrst  two  cases,  the  lack  of  convergence  is  seen  in  terms  of  an  energy  drift  at  large  numbers  of
epochs,  which  happens  after  a  short  plateau  close  to  the  physical  minimum.  In  the  latter  case,
a  numerical  instability  precludes  any  minimisation  past  100  epochs.  Let  us  stress  that  all  the
simulations  shown  in  Fig.         6 employed  the  exact  same  set  of  hyperparameters  (see  Supplemental
Material).   In   this   context,   it   does   not   seem   unreasonable   to   expect   that   further   reﬁnements
of  the  DGD  optimisation  algorithm  may  lead  to  a  systematic  convergence  to  the  ground-state
energy.
    We   provide   further   insight   on   the   performance   of   the   DGD   optimiser   in   Fig.                7,   where   we
compare  it  to  our  best  NGD-based  optimiser,  QN-MR-KFAC.  Overall,  we  observe  that  the  DGD
optimiser  generally  performs  as  well  as,  if  not  better  than,  QN-MR-KFAC  in  terms  of  accuracy
and  speed  of  convergence.  In  the  attractive  regime,  corresponding  to  the  panels  left  and  including
the  central  column,  we  ﬁnd  that  the  two  optimisers  perform  almost  equally  well.  DGD,  however,
improves   on   the   stability   of   the   minimisation,   avoiding   the   jumps   that   QN-MR-KFAC   shows
during  the  minimisation  process.  Similar  conclusions  hold  for  the  repulsive  regime  (panels  right
to  the  central  column),  although  some  cases  with  A g 5  are  challenging  for  both  optimisers.
    Compared  to  NGD,  we  interpret  the  overall  improvement  of  DGD  in  terms  of  the  direct  link
that  is  established  between  the  local  model  and  the  loss  function.  Compared  to  QN-MR-KFAC,
the  fact  that  we  keep  a  positive  semi-deﬁnite  metric,  unlike  the  quasi-Hessian  of  Eq.     (3.31),  is
also  an  advantage  that  avoids  the  instabilities  discussed  in  Sec.                 (e).
    As  an  additional  example  that  showcases  the  optimisation  power  of  DGD,  we  now  proceed
to  compare  DGD  results  with  Adam  [26].  We  have  relied  on  Adam  in  the  NQS  applications  of
                                                                                                                                                 23

















Figure  8:  Evolution  of  the  energy  E(¹)  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  epochs  for  Adam  (solid
blue  line)  and  for  DGD  (solid  red  line)  with  NMR  = 50,  in  the  case  of  A = 5  and  V0  = −20.



Ref.  [7],  where  we  employ  the  default  hyperparameters  and  a  learning  rate  of  10−4.  In  that  case,
we  train  the  network  to  minimise  the  energy  for  105   epochs.  This  relatively  long  training  process
is  required  to  guarantee  the  convergence  of  the  energy,  which  is  particularly  slow  in  the  last  part
of  the  training,  when  approaching  the  energy  minimum.
    In   Fig.  8,   we   display   illustrative   results   for   A = 5   and   V0  = −20   for   Adam   and   DGD.   The
results  show  that  the  number  of  epochs  required  to  reach  a  similar  level  of  accuracy  in  the  energy
minimum   is   dramatically   reduced   when   using   DGD.   Such   speed-up   is   even   more   pronounced
when  we  focus  on  the  correlation  stage  i.e.  when  comparing  the  number  of  epochs  to  converge,
starting  from  the  epoch  where  the  HF  energy  has  been  reached.  Interestingly,  the  ﬂuctuations  on
the  energy  value  between  epochs  are  also  substantially  reduced.  DGD  achieves  oscillations  that
are  well  within  0.1  in  HO  units  within  a  few  hundred  epochs.  In  contrast,  Adam  only  reaches  a
similar  level  of  accuracy  well  past  20000  epochs.
    We  note  that  we  have  performed  more  extensive  comparisons  between  DGD  and  Adam  and
we  show  these  in  the  Supplemental  Material.  These  extensive  comparisons  indicate  that,  while
the   number   of   epochs   that   Adam   requires   to   converge   increases   with   A,   the   performance   of
DGD  stays  relatively  constant.  This  should  be  helpful  for  tackling  larger  system  in  future  NQS
simulations.  Overall,  compared  to  Adam,  DGD  shows  a  strong  adaptability  to  the  optimisation
problem  and  a  particularly  high  performance  in  the  late  stage  of  convergence.  Those  two  empirical
features  are  typical  of  second-order  optimisers  [32].
    Finally,   let   us   also   comment   on   the   wall-time   associated   to   the   diﬀerent   methods.   DGD
brings  in  a  substantial  acceleration  in  terms  of  wall-time,  thanks  to  the  reduction  in  the  number
of  epochs.  A  timing  proﬁle  of  our  NQS  implementation  [                   77]  indicates  that  the  dominant  time
factor   is   the   Markov   Chain   Monte   Carlo   (MCMC)   propagation.   Our   MCMC   is   particularly
demanding,  because  we  have  run  simulations  with  a  large  number  of  MH  steps  in  order  to  avoid
autocorrelation  issues.  It  is  likely  that  the  wall-time  per  epoch  can  be  reduced  further  by  setting
a   more   reasonable   number   of   MH   iterations   per   epoch.   This   would   aﬀect   the   performance   of
both  Adam  and  DGD.  Further  quantiﬁcation  of  the  numerical  complexity  of  the  DGD  optimiser
are  left  for  future  work.

5.   Conclusion  and  outlook

NQS  are  a  promising  new  tool  in  quantum  many-body  physics.  In  nuclear  physics,  these  methods
hold  the  promise  to  become  a  competitive  ab  initio  approach,  tackling  nuclei  from  ﬁrst  principles.
In  particular,  given  their  VMC  underpinning,  these  methods  may  reach  relatively  large  particle
numbers  with  a  commensurate  computational  cost.  The  extension  of  NQS  techniques  to  heavier                                            24
systems   requires   technical   developments   for   the   energy   optimisation   process.   Here,   we   have
focused  on  improving  existing  state-of-the-art  optimisation  schemes  for  NQS.
    We  have  compared  several  optimisation  schemes  on  a  one-to-one  basis.  We  employ  the  setting
and  toy  model  of  Ref.  [7]  as  a  test  bed,  which  has  a  rich  phenomenology  in  spite  of  its  simplicity.
We  hope  that  the  conclusions  we  draw  can  be  extrapolated  to  other  systems.  We  mainly  focus
on  the  KFAC  algorithm,  that  has  been  extensively  employed  in  past  NQS  simulations  [3].  Our
numerical   analysis   indicates   that   KFAC   cannot   be   employed   safely   in   a   general   VMC-NQS
setting.  We   ﬁnd  a  series  of   large  oscillations  in  the   minimisation  process  for   a  wide  variety  of
physical   properties.   KFAC   was   originally   designed   for   tackling   supervised   learning   problems
with  feed-forward  NNs.  Instead,  VMC  falls  into  the  category  of  reinforcement  learning  problems
and  NQS  architectures  are  rarely  simple  feed-forward  networks.  New  and  original  approaches
are  necessary  in  order  to  recover  the  performance  of  second-order  optimisers  within  a  general
VMC-NQS  setting.
    In  an  eﬀort  to  remedy  the  situation,  we  ﬁrst  propose  two  variants  of  KFAC  that  try  to  bridge
the  gap  towards  VMC-NQS.  First,  to  account  for  the  fact  that  VMC  is  not  a  supervised  learning
problem,   we   replace   the   exact   FIM   used   in   the   rescaling   phase   by   an   approximation   of   the
Hessian  of  the  energy,  which  can  be  computed  easily  but  is  not  positive-deﬁnite.  The  resulting
approach,  dubbed  QN-KFAC,  is  more  stable  than  the  original  KFAC  implementation,  but  its
convergence   is   still   erratic   in   half   the   cases.   Second,   to   adapt   KFAC   to   a   general   NQS,   we
propose  an  improvement  in  the  direction  estimation  of  the  parameter  updates  using  the  MINRES
iterative   linear   solver.   This   allows   us   to   mitigate   the   breaking   of   the   Kronecker   factorisation
due  to  the  permutation-equivariant  structure  of  our  NQS.  The  resulting  optimisation  scheme,
QN-MR-KFAC,  is  much  more  stable  and  accurate  than  any  of  the  previous  optimisers.  In  spite
of  the  improvements,  this  optimiser  still  shows  instabilities  and  spikes  in  energy,  even  close  to
the  minimum.
    Our  third  and  last  attempt  to  improve  the  optimisation  of  NQS  is  a  radical  departure  from
KFAC.  Instead  of  employing  information  geometry  to  inform  the  learning  process  of  our  model,
we  take  a  decisional  approach  based  on  game  theory  developments.  This  allows  us  to  design  an
optimisation  scheme  that  is  tailored  to  our  VMC  calculations.  The  associated  decision  geometry
deﬁnes  an  alternative  positive  semi-deﬁnite  metric  which  restores  the  link  between  geometry  and
loss  function.  This  so-called  DGD  method  has  a  similar  computational  cost  to  others,  but  provides
a  much  faster,  and  much  more  stable,  minimisation  pattern.  A  relatively  simple  implementation
of   DGD   shows   already   a   fast   and   stable   convergence   in   more   than   85%   of   the   cases.   Because
our  toy  model  is  relatively  generic  but  incorporates  a  wide  phenomenology,  we  expect  similar
improvements  in  other  quantum  many-body  systems.  In  particular,  we  hope  that  our  optimisation
strategies  will  be  useful  in  developing  NQS  further  for  nuclear  physics  applications.
    The   overall   stability   of   DGD   indicates   that   it   has   superior   capabilities   when   it   comes   to
VMC  as  compared  to  KFAC  or  any  of  the  resulting  approaches  we  derived.  Many  improvements
on   this   ﬁrst   implementation   of   DGD   can   already   be   anticipated.   To   mention   just   a   few,   one
could  improve  the  stability  and  speed  of  convergence  by  implementing  a  better  damping  scheme,
following  Ref.  [69].  The  overall  wall-time  could  also  be  reduced  by  replacing  the  iterative  linear
solver,  MINRES,  with  another  one  minimising  directly  the  quadratic  sub-problem  in  Eq.  (4.15).
Recently,   some   groups   have   also   proposed   alternative   approximations   to   KFAC   that   aim   at
reducing  the  cost  of  solving  linear  systems  at  each  epoch  [55,56,78].  Adapting  those  techniques
to  DGD  could  lead  to  important  reductions  of  the  wall-time  per  epoch.
    We   note   also   that   other   attempts   at   designing   better   metrics   than   the   FIM   have   recently
appeared       [79].    In    this    context,    decision    geometry    provides    a    framework    of    choice    due    its
high   degree   of   ﬂexibility.   In   particular,   it   is   intriguing   that   the   potential   energy,   a   crucial
characterisation  of  the  optimisation  problem,  cancels  out  in  the  generation  of  the  divergence  in
Eq.  (4.11).  Building  new  divergence  functions  incorporating  information  on  the  potential  energy
could   be   an   interesting   avenue   to   further   reﬁne   the   geometry   to   the   particular   optimisation
problem.  We  are  currently  working  on  exploiting  this  ﬂexibility  to  study  spin  lattice  systems  [                        74].
Finally,  beyond  considerations  on  VMC  and  NQS,  the  versatility  of  decision  geometry  suggests                                         25
that  it  could  be  a  promising  avenue  to  design  fast  and  robust  optimisation  strategies  for  a  broad
class  of  machine  learning  problems.
Conﬂict  of  Interest  Statement

The  authors  declare  that  the  research  was  conducted  in  the  absence  of  any  commercial  or  ﬁnancial
relationships  that  could  be  construed  as  a  potential  conﬂict  of  interest.

Funding.       This   work   is   supported   by   STFC,   through   Grants   Nos   ST/L005743/1   and   ST/P005314/1;
by   grant   PID2020-118758GB-I00   funded   by   MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033;   by   the   “Ramón   y
Cajal"  grant   RYC2018-026072  funded   by   MCIN/AEI  /10.13039/501100011033   and  FSE  “El   FSE  invierte
en   tu   futuro”;   by   the   “Consolidación   Investigadora"   Grant   CNS2022-135529   funded   by   MCIN/AEI/
10.13039/501100011033    and    by    the    “European    Union    NextGenerationEU/PRTR”;    by    the    “Unit    of
Excellence  María  de  Maeztu  2020-2023"  award  to  the  Institute  of  Cosmos  Sciences,  Grant  CEX2019-000918-
M   funded   by   MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033.   TRIUMF   receives   federal   funding   via   a   contribution
agreement   with   the   National   Research   Council   of   Canada.   This   work   has   been   ﬁnancially   supported
by   the   Ministry   of   Economic   Aﬀairs   and   Digital   Transformation   of   the   Spanish   Government   through
the   QUANTUM   ENIA   project   call   -   Quantum   Spain   project,   and   by   the   European   Union   through   the
Recovery,   Transformation   and   Resilience   Plan   -   NextGenerationEU   within   the   framework   of   the   Digital
Spain   2026   Agenda.   The   authors   gratefully   acknowledge   the   computer   resources   at   Artemisa,   funded   by
the   European   Union   ERDF   and   Comunitat   Valenciana   as   well   as   the   technical   support   provided   by   the
Instituto   de   Fisica   Corpuscular,   IFIC   (CSIC-UV).

Supplemental  material

We  provide  a  Supplemental  Material  ﬁle.
Data,  code  and  materials

The   source   code   used   for   this   study   can   be   found   in   the   GitHub   repository             https://github.
com/jwtkeeble/second-order-optimization-NQS.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  Richard  Zou  and  the  rest  of  the  functorch  team  for  their  support
and  fruitful  discussion  in  using  the  torch.func  namespace.
References
 1.   Carleo  G,  Troyer  M.  2017  Solving  the  quantum  many-body  problem  with  artiﬁcial  neural
     networks.  Science   355,  602–606.  (           10.1126/science.aag2302)
 2.   Hermann   J,   Spencer   J,   Choo   K,   Mezzacapo   A,   Foulkes   WMC,   Pfau   D,   Carleo   G,   Noé   F.
     2023  Ab  initio  quantum  chemistry  with  neural-network  wavefunctions.  Nat.   Rev.   Chem.  7,
     692–709.  (    10.1038/s41570-023-00516-8)
 3.   Pfau   D,   Spencer   JS,   Matthews   AG,   Foulkes   WMC.   2020   Ab   initio   solution   of   the   many-
     electron    Schrödinger    equation    with    deep    neural    networks.    Phys.    Rev.    Res.    2,    033429.
     (10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429)
 4.   Hermann  J,  Schätzle  Z,  Noé  F.  2020  Deep-neural-network  solution  of  the  electronic  Schrödinger
     equation.  Nat.   Chem.  12,  891–897.  (            10.1038/s41557-020-0544-y)
 5.   Spencer  JS,  Pfau  D,  Botev  A,  Foulkes  WMC.  2020  Better,  faster  fermionic  neural  networks.
     arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2011.07125.  (10.48550/arXiv.2011.07125)
 6.   von   Glehn   I,   Spencer   JS,   Pfau   D.   2022   A   Self-Attention   Ansatz   for   Ab-initio   Quantum
     Chemistry.  arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2211.13672.  (10.48550/arXiv.2211.13672)
 7.   Keeble  JWT,  Drissi  M,  Rojo-Francàs  A,  Juliá-Díaz  B,  Rios  A.  2023  Machine  learning  one-                                         26
     dimensional  spinless  trapped  fermionic  systems  with  neural-network  quantum  states.  Phys.
     Rev.   A  108,  063320.  (10.1103/PhysRevA.108.063320)
 8.   Pescia      G,      Nys      J,      Kim      J,      Lovato      A,      Carleo      G.      2023      Message-Passing      Neural
     Quantum    States    for    the    Homogeneous    Electron    Gas.    arXiv    preprint    arXiv:2305.07240.
     (10.48550/arXiv.2305.07240)
 9.   Rigo    M,    Hall    B,    Hjorth-Jensen    M,    Lovato    A,    Pederiva    F.    2023    Solving    the    nuclear
     pairing      model      with      neural      network      quantum      states.      Phys.      Rev.      E      107,      025310.
     (10.1103/PhysRevE.107.025310)
10.   Kim   J,   Pescia   G,   Fore   B,   Nys   J,   Carleo   G,   Gandolﬁ   S,   Hjorth-Jensen   M,   Lovato   A.   2023
     Neural-network  quantum  states  for  ultra-cold  Fermi  gases.  arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2305.08831.
     (10.48550/arXiv.2305.08831)
11.   Lou      WT,      Sutterud      H,      Cassella      G,      Foulkes      WMC,      Knolle      J,      Pfau      D,      Spencer
     JS.     2023     Neural     Wave     Functions     for     Superﬂuids.       arXiv     preprint     arXiv:2305.06989.
     (10.48550/arXiv.2305.06989)
12.   Becca  F,  Sorella  S.  2017  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Approaches  for  Correlated  Systems.  Cambridge
     University  Press.  (10.1017/9781316417041)
13.   Martin  RM,  Reining  L,  Ceperley  DM.  2016  Interacting  Electrons:  Theory  and  Computational
     Approaches.  Cambridge  University  Press.  (10.1017/CBO9781139050807.007)
14.   Keeble    J,    Rios    A.    2020    Machine    learning    the    deuteron.    Phys.    Lett.    B     809,    135743.
     (10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135743)
15.   Adams  C,  Carleo  G,  Lovato  A,  Rocco  N.  2021  Variational  Monte  Carlo  Calculations  of  A f 4
     Nuclei  with  an  Artiﬁcial  Neural-Network  Correlator  Ansatz.    Phys.   Rev.   Lett.  127,  022502.
     (10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.022502)
16.   Gnech   A,   Adams   C,   Brawand   N,   Carleo   G,   Lovato   A,   Rocco   N.   2022   Nuclei   with   Up
     to   A=6   Nucleons   with   Artiﬁcial   Neural   Network   Wave   Functions.     Few-Body   Syst.   63,   7.
     (10.1007/s00601-021-01706-0)
17.   Gnech  A,  Fore  B,  Lovato  A.  2023  Distilling  the  essential  elements  of  nuclear  binding  via  neural-
     network  quantum  states.  arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2308.16266.  (10.48550/arXiv.2308.16266)
18.   Pescia  G,  Han  J,  Lovato  A,  Lu  J,  Carleo  G.  2022  Neural-network  quantum  states  for  periodic
     systems  in  continuous  space.  Phys.  Rev.  Res.  4,  023138.  (10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.023138)
19.   Fore     B,     Kim     JM,     Carleo     G,     Hjorth-Jensen     M,     Lovato     A,     Piarulli     M.     2023     Dilute
     neutron    star    matter    from    neural-network    quantum    states.    Phys.    Rev.    Res.    5,    033062.
     (10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.033062)
20.   Carlson   J,   Gandolﬁ   S,   Pederiva   F,   Pieper   SC,   Schiavilla   R,   Schmidt   KE,   Wiringa   RB.
     2015  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  methods  for  nuclear  physics.  Rev.   Mod.   Phys.  87,  1067–1118.
     (10.1103/RevModPhys.87.1067)
21.   Lomnitz-Adler  J,  Pandharipande  VR,  Smith  RA.  1981  Monte  Carlo  calculations  of  triton  and
     4He  nuclei  with  the  Reid  potential.  Nucl.  Phys.  A  361,  399–411.  (               10.1016/0375-9474(81)90642-
     4)
22.   Hagen  G,  Papenbrock  T,  Hjorth-Jensen  M,  Dean  DJ.  2014  Coupled-cluster  computations  of
     atomic  nuclei.  Rep.   Prog.   Phys.  77,  096302.  (10.1088/0034-4885/77/9/096302)
23.   Hergert  H,  Bogner  SK,  Morris  TD,  Schwenk  A,  Tsukiyama  K.  2016  The  In-Medium  Similarity
     Renormalization   Group:   A   novel   ab   initio   method   for   nuclei.   Phys.   Rep.   621,   165–222.
     (10.1016/j.physrep.2015.12.007)
24.   Somà  V.  2020  Self-Consistent  Green’s  Function  Theory  for  Atomic  Nuclei.  Front.   Phys.  8.
     (10.3389/fphy.2020.00340)
25.   Baydin   AG,   Pearlmutter   BA,   Radul   AA,   Siskind   JM.   2018   Automatic   diﬀerentiation   in
     machine  learning:  a  survey.  J.   Mach.   Learn.   Res.  18,  1–43.  (              10.48550/arXiv.1502.05767)
26.   Kingma   D,   Ba   J.   2015   Adam:   A   Method   for   Stochastic   Optimization.   In   International
     Conference   on   Learning   Representations   (ICLR).  (10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980)
27.   Sorella  S.  1998  Green  function  Monte  Carlo  with  stochastic  reconﬁguration.    Phys.   Rev.   Lett.
     80,  4558.
28.   Sorella  S.  2001  Generalized  Lanczos  algorithm  for  variational  quantum  Monte  Carlo.  Phys.
     Rev.   B   64,  024512.  (10.1103/PhysRevB.64.024512)
29.   Park  CY,  Kastoryano  MJ.  2020  Geometry  of  learning  neural  quantum  states.  Phys.  Rev.  Res.
     2,  023232.  (10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023232)
30.   Martens      J,      Grosse      R.      2015      Optimizing      neural      networks      with      Kronecker-factored
     approximate   curvature.   In   International   conference   on   machine   learning   pp.   2408–2417.                                     27
     (10.48550/arXiv.1503.05671)
31.   Grosse  R,  Martens  J.  2016  A  Kronecker-factored  approximate  Fisher  matrix  for  convolution
     layers.  In  NeurIPS  pp.  573–582.  (          10.48550/arXiv.1602.01407)
32.   Martens   J.   2020   New   insights   and   perspectives   on   the   natural   gradient   method.  J.   Mach.
     Learn.   Res.  21,  5776–5851.  (        10.48550/arXiv.1412.1193)
33.   Wilson   M,   Gao   N,   Wudarski   F,   Rieﬀel   E,   Tubman   NM.   2021   Simulations   of   state-of-the-
     art   fermionic   neural   network   wave   functions   with   diﬀusion   Monte   Carlo.     arXiv   preprint
     arXiv:2103.12570.  (10.48550/arXiv.2103.12570)
34.   Amari   Si.   1983   A   foundation   of   information   geometry.   Electron.   Commun.   Jpn.   (Part   I:
     Commun.)  66,  1–10.  (         10.1002/ecja.4400660602)
35.   Amari  Si.  2016  Information   geometry   and   its   applications  vol.  194.  Springer.  (10.1007/978-4-
     431-55978-8)
36.   Dawid  AP,  Lauritzen  SL.  2005  The  geometry  of  decision  theory.  In  Proceedings   of   the   Second
     International  Symposium  on  Information  Geometry  and  its  Applications  pp.  22–28.  University
     of  Tokyo.
37.   Dawid   AP.   2007   The   geometry   of   proper   scoring   rules.   Ann.   Inst.   Stat.   Math.   59,   77–93.
     (10.1007/s10463-006-0099-8)
38.   Gneiting  T,  Raftery  AE.  2007  Strictly  proper  scoring  rules,  prediction,  and  estimation.  J.
     Am.   Stat.   Assoc.  102,  359–378.  (        10.1198/016214506000001437)
39.   Girardeau     MD,     Olshanii     M.     2003     Fermi-Bose     mapping     and     N-particle     ground     state
     of   spin-polarized   fermions   in   tight   atom   waveguides.   arXiv    preprint    cond-mat/0309396.
     (10.48550/arXiv.cond-mat/0309396)
40.   Granger     BE,     Blume     D.     2004     Tuning     the     Interactions     of     Spin-Polarized     Fermions
     Using          Quasi-One-Dimensional          Conﬁnement.             Phys.          Rev.          Lett.          92,          133202.
     (10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.133202)
41.   Valiente  M.  2020  Bose-Fermi  dualities  for  arbitrary  one-dimensional  quantum  systems  in  the
     universal  low-energy  regime.  Phys.   Rev.   A  102,  053304.  (10.1103/PhysRevA.102.053304)
42.   Wigner     E.     1934     On     the     interaction     of     electrons     in     metals.     Phys.     Rev.     46,     1002.
     (10.1103/PhysRev.46.1002)
43.   Ziani   N,   Cavaliere   F,   Becerra   K,   Sassetti   M.   2020   A   Short   Review   of   One-Dimensional
     Wigner  Crystallization.  Crystals   11.  (10.3390/cryst11010020)
44.   Rojo-Francàs    A,    Polls    A,    Juliá-Díaz    B.    2020    Static    and    Dynamic    Properties    of    a    Few
     Spin   1/2   Interacting   Fermions   Trapped   in   a   Harmonic   Potential.   Mathematics    8,   1196.
     (10.3390/math8071196)
45.   Nocedal  J,  Wright  SJ.  2006  Numerical   optimization.  Springer  New  York,  NY.  (10.1007/978-
     0-387-40065-5)
46.   Keeble  J.  2022  Neural   Network   Solutions   to   the   Fermionic   Schrödinger   Equation.  PhD  thesis
     University  of  Surrey.  (10.15126/thesis.900505)
47.   Luo  D,  Clark  BK.  2019  Backﬂow  Transformations  via  Neural  Networks  for  Quantum  Many-
     Body  Wave  Functions.  Phys.   Rev.   Lett.  122,  226401.  (10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.226401)
48.   Metropolis   N,   Ulam   S.   1949   The   Monte   Carlo   method.   J.   Am.   Stat.   Assoc.   44,   335–341.
     (10.1080/01621459.1949.10483310)
49.   Hastings    WK.    1970    Monte    Carlo    sampling    methods    using    Markov    Chains    and    their
     applications.  Biometrika   57,  97–109.  (            10.1093/biomet/57.1.97)
50.   Baumeister  J.  1987  Stable   Solution   of   Inverse   Problems.  Advanced  Lectures  in  Mathematics.
     Vieweg+Teubner  Verlag  Wiesbaden.  (10.1007/978-3-322-83967-1)
51.   Amari  Si.  1998  Natural  Gradient  Works  Eﬃciently  in  Learning  .      Neural  Comput.  10,  251–279.
     (10.1162/089976698300017746)
52.   Amari    S,    Douglas    S.    1998    Why    natural    gradient?.    In    Proceedings    of    the    1998    IEEE
     International   Conference   on   Acoustics,   Speech   and   Signal   Processing,   ICASSP   ’98   (Cat.
     No.98CH36181)  vol.  2  pp.  1213–1216  vol.2.  (               10.1109/ICASSP.1998.675489)
53.   Sorella  S.  2005  Wave  function  optimization  in  the  variational  Monte  Carlo  method.  Phys.
     Rev.   B   71,  241103.  (10.1103/PhysRevB.71.241103)
54.   Stokes  J,  Izaac  J,  Killoran  N,  Carleo  G.  2020  Quantum  Natural  Gradient.  Quantum   4,  269.
     (10.22331/q-2020-05-25-269)
55.   Chen  A,  Heyl  M.  2023  Eﬃcient  optimization  of  deep  neural  quantum  states  toward  machine
     precision.  arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2302.01941.  (10.48550/arXiv.2302.01941)
56.   Rende  R,  Viteritti  LL,  Bardone  L,  Becca  F,  Goldt  S.  2023  A  simple  linear  algebra  identity                                  28
     to   optimize   large-scale   neural   network   quantum   states.   arXiv   preprint   arXiv:2310.05715.
     (10.48550/arXiv.2310.05715)
57.   Vicentini   F,   Hofmann   D,   Szabó   A,   Wu   D,   Roth   C,   Giuliani   C,   Pescia   G,   Nys   J,   Vargas-
     Calderón   V,   Astrakhantsev   N,   Carleo   G.   2022   NetKet   3:   Machine   Learning   Toolbox   for
     Many-Body  Quantum  Systems.  SciPost  Phys.  Codebases  p.  7.  (10.21468/SciPostPhysCodeb.7)
58.   Moré  JJ.  2006  The  Levenberg-Marquardt  algorithm:  implementation  and  theory.  In  Numerical
     Analysis:   Proceedings   of   the   Biennial   Conference   Held   at   Dundee   pp.   105–116.   Springer.
     (10.1007/BFb0067700)
59.   Hinton   GE,   Salakhutdinov   RR.   2006   Reducing   the   dimensionality   of   data   with   neural
     networks.  Science   313,  504–507.  (           10.1126/science.1127647)
60.   Martens            J.            2010            Deep            Learning            via            Hessian-Free            Optimization.            In
     Proceedings        of        the        27th        International        Conference        on        International        Conference
     on           Machine           Learning            ICML’10            p.            735–742.            Omnipress.            Available            at
     https://www.cs.toronto.edu/  jmartens/docs/Deep_HessianFree.pdf.
61.   Ba   J,   Grosse   R,   Martens   J.   2017   Distributed   second-order   optimization   using   Kronecker-
     factored  approximations.  In  International   Conference   on   Learning   Representations.  Available
     at  https://jimmylba.github.io/papers/nsync.pdf.
62.   Wilson  M,  Moroni  S,  Holzmann  M,  Gao  N,  Wudarski  F,  Vegge  T,  Bhowmik  A.  2022  Wave
     function  ansatz  (but  periodic)  networks  and  the  homogeneous  electron  gas.  arXiv   preprint
     arXiv:2202.04622.  (10.48550/arXiv.2202.04622)
63.   Heskes   T.   2000   On   “natural”   learning   and   pruning   in   multilayered   perceptrons.      Neural
     Computation   12,  881–901.
64.   Pascanu  R,  Bengio  Y.  2013  Revisiting  Natural  Gradient  for  Deep  Networks.  arXiv   preprint
     arXiv:1301.3584.
65.   Lin  X,  Zhang  H,  Rappe  AM.  2000  Optimization  of  quantum  Monte  Carlo  wave  functions
     using  analytical  energy  derivatives.  J.   Chem.   Phys.  112,  2650–2654.  (                    10.1063/1.480839)
66.   Umrigar  C,  Filippi  C.  2005  Energy  and  variance  optimization  of  many-body  wave  functions.
     Phys.   Rev.   Lett.  94,  150201.  (10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.150201)
67.   Schraudolph   NN.   2002   Fast   curvature   matrix-vector   products   for   second-order   gradient
     descent.  Neural   computation   14,  1723–1738.
68.   Henderson  HV,  Searle  SR.  1981  The  vec-permutation  matrix,  the  vec  operator  and  Kronecker
     products:  A  review.  Linear   Multilinear   Algebra   9,  271–288.  (                10.1080/03081088108817379)
69.   Martens    J,    Sutskever    I.    2012    Training    deep    and    recurrent    networks    with    hessian-free
     optimization.  In  Neural   Networks:   Tricks   of   the   Trade  ,  pp.  479–535.  Springer.  (                10.1007/978-
     3-642-35289-8_27)
70.   Topsøe  F.  1979  Information-theoretical  optimization  techniques.  Kybernetika   15,  8–27.
71.   Grünwald  PD,  Dawid  AP.  2004  Game  theory,  maximum  entropy,  minimum  discrepancy  and
     robust  Bayesian  decision  theory.  Ann.   Stat.  32,  1367.  (10.1214/009053604000000553)
72.   Ferguson  TS.  1967  Mathematical   Statistics:   A   Decision   Theoretic   Approach.  Academic  Press.
     (10.1016/C2013-0-07705-5)
73.   Ehm  W,  Gneiting  T.  2012  Local  proper  scoring  rules  of  order  two.  The   Annals   of   Statistics
     40,  609  –  637.  (  10.1214/12-AOS973)
74.   Keeble  J,  Drissi  M,  Rozalén  Sarmiento  J,  Rios  A.  2024  A  decisional  step  in  Variational  Monte
     Carlo.  In  preparation.
75.   Hyvärinen  A.  2005  Estimation  of  Non-Normalized  Statistical  Models  by  Score  Matching.  J.
     Mach.   Learn.   Res.  6,  695–709.  Available  at            http://jmlr.org/papers/v6/hyvarinen05a.html.
76.   Hyvärinen  A.  2007  Some  extensions  of  score  matching.  Comput.   Stat.   Data   Anal.  51,  2499.
     (10.1016/j.csda.2006.09.003)
77.   Azzam  A.  2023  Transfer   Learning   For   Many-Body   Systems.  Master’s  Thesis  University  of
     Barcelona.  Available  at         http://hdl.handle.net/2445/202717.
78.   Goldshlager   G,   Abrahamsen   N,   Lin   L.   2024   A   Kaczmarz-inspired   approach   to   accelerate
     the     optimization     of     neural     network     wavefunctions.     arXiv     preprint     arXiv:2401.10190.
     (10.48550/arXiv.2401.10190)
79.   Sasaki  T,  Miyahara  H.  2024  Quantum  natural  gradient  without  monotonicity.  arXiv   preprint
     arXiv:2401.13237.  (10.48550/arXiv.2401.13237)
                                                              Supplemental  Material:
                                                              "Second-order  optimisation
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta                       strategies  for  neural  network
Research                                                      quantum  states"
                                                              M.  Drissi1,  J.  W.  T.  Keeble2,  J.  Rozalén

Accepted  in  Phil.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  A                      Sarmiento3,4   and  A.  Rios2,3,4

                                                               1TRIUMF,  Vancouver,  V6T  2A3,  British  Columbia,
Subject   Areas:                                              Canada
quantum  physics,  nuclear  physics,                          2   Department  of  Physics,  University  of  Surrey,
artiﬁcial  intelligence,  game  theory                        Guildford  GU2  7XH,  United  Kingdom
Keywords:                                                     3   Departament  de  Física  Quàntica  i  Astrofísica,
neural  network  quantum  states,                             Universitat  de  Barcelona  (UB),  c.  Martí  i  Franquès
Variational  Monte  Carlo,  game                              1,  E08028  Barcelona,  Spain
theory,  decision  geometry,                                  4   Institut  de  Ciències  del  Cosmos  (ICCUB),
optimisation                                                  Universitat  de  Barcelona  (UB),  Barcelona,  Spain


Author   for   correspondence:
M.  Drissi                                                    1.   MINRES
e-mail:  mdrissi@triumf.ca                                    In   the   main   text   we   argue   that   the   original   arguments
                                                              that   motivate   the   Kronecker   factorisation   in   KFAC   do
                                                              not  hold  in  NQS.  To  compensate  for  this  incompatibility,
                                                             we  introduce  an  additional  step  in  QN-KFAC.  Our  goal
                                                              is   to   improve   on   the   direction   of   the   update   ∆KFACn
                                                              starting  from  the  one  obtained  from  KFAC.  To  do  so,  we
                                                              use   an   iterative   solver   for   linear   equations.   We   employ
                                                              MINRES  [1],  an  algorithm  that  solves  linear  systems,

                                                                                               M x = y,                                                              (1.1)

                                                              for  sparse,  symmetric  matrices,  M ,  and  output  vectors,  y.
                                                             The  idea  of  MINRES  is  to  combine  a  Lanczos  algorithm
                                                             with  an  LQ  factorisation  in  order  to  minimise  the  squared
                                                              residual
                                                                                r(x)2  ≡ (M x  −  y)T(M x  −  y).                             (1.2)

                                                             The  Lanczos  part  approximately  tridiagonalise  M   as

                                                                                          Tk  = V Tk  M Vk   ,                                                    (1.3)

                                                             where  Vk  denotes  here  the  matrix  of  Lanczos  vectors  after
                                                              k   iterations   and   Tk   denotes   the   associated   tridiagonal
                                                              matrix  containing  the  Lanczos  coeﬃcients.  Both  matrices
                                                              are  of  size  k  ×  k.  Given  the  fact  that  we  enforce  k  f NMR
                                                             we  are  guaranteed  that  Tk   is  at  most  of  the  much  smaller
                                                              size  NMR  ×  NMR.  The  rest  of  the  MINRES  algorithm

                                                                ©          The     Authors.           Published     by     the     Royal     Society     under
                                                                the      terms      of      the      Creative      Commons      Attribution      License
                                                                http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
                                                                by/4.0/,   which   permits   unrestricted   use,   provided   the   original
                                                                author   and   source   are   credited.
consists  then  in  applying  a  LQ  factorisation  on  Tk   and  using  the  obtained  factors  to  build  an                                                        2
approximate   solution   of   the   linear   system   Eq.   (1.1).   Since   the   matrices   Tk    are   of   small   size
this  part  of  the  algorithm  is  usually  of  a  negligible  numerical  cost  as  long  as  NMR   can  be  kept
relatively  small.  For  more  details  on  MINRES  we  refer  to  Ref.  [1].
     In  our  case,  we  use  MINRES  to  ﬁnd  an  approximate  solution  to  the  system
                                                  (     ˘F (¹n)  +  ¼nI )     ∆M
                                                                              n     = −∇E(¹n) ,                                                                                      (1.4)

using  ∆KFACn                as  an  initial  guess.  We  recall  that    ˘F   is  the  block-diagonal  approximation  of  the  FIM
as  deﬁned  in  the  main  text.  Since  we  use  the  block-diagonal  FIM    without   the  KFAC  in  Eq.  (1.4)
we   consider   it   to   be   reasonable   to   choose   the   same   trust   region   used   for   the   rescaling   (which
uses  the  exact  FIM).  Following  Ref.  [2],  we  also  use  the  preconditioner  (    diag(  ˘F (¹n))  +  »I )     ξ    with
» = 10−    2   and  À  = 0.75  to  accelerate  the  convergence  of  the  linear  solver.  In  addition,  MINRES
is  stopped  as  soon  as  we  achieve  a  relative  residual  smaller  than  10−    8   or  when  the  number  of
iteration  reaches  a  maximum  number,  NMR.
2.   Decisional  Gradient  Descent:  divergence

We  now  show  how  to  obtain  the  ﬁnal  expression  for  the  divergence  used  in  the  Decisional  Gradient
Descent  optimiser  from  its  deﬁnition
    DVMC(pθ  , pθ   ′ ) = EX ∼    pθ        [   EL,θ    (X )  −  EL,θ      ′ (X )]

                                    ∑A                [   ∂ 2xk  ln |Ψθ   ′ |  +  (∂xk  ln |Ψθ   ′ |)2  −  ∂ 2xk  ln |Ψθ  |  −  (∂xk  ln |Ψθ  |)2]      .
                             =  12        EX ∼    pθ
                                    k=1
Now,  using  the  fact  that  pθ   = |Ψθ  |2,  we  have
                                          ∑A                [   2∂ 2xk  (ln pθ   ′  −  ln pθ  )  +  (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  −  (∂xk  ln pθ  )2]
          DVMC(pθ  , pθ   ′ ) =  18             EX ∼    pθ
                                          k=1
                                          ∑A                {     [     ∂ 2xk pθ   ′
                                   =  18        EX ∼    pθ     2       pθ   ′         −  (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  −   ∂ 2xk pθpθ          +  (∂xk  ln pθ  )2]
                                          k=1
                                   +   (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  −  (∂xk  ln pθ  )2}
                                          ∑A                [
                                   =  18        EX ∼    pθ    2 ∂ 2xk pθ   ′pθ   ′         −  2 ∂ 2xk pθpθ          −  (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  +  (∂xk  ln pθ  )2].
                                          k=1
We  shall  now  compute  the  ﬁrst  two  terms  inside  the  square  bracket  individually  for  a  given     k.
For  the  ﬁrst  one  can  integrate  by  parts  so  that
                      [     ∂ 2xk pθ   ′] ∫                    ∫
          EX ∼    pθ       pθ   ′     =      d(X \{xk })          dxk   pθ  (X )pθ   ′ (X ) ∂ 2xk pθ   ′ (X )
                                          [      pθ  (X )                ]     +∞     ∫
                                      =      pθ   ′ (X ) ∂xk pθ   ′ (X )          −     dX ∂xk pθ   ′ (X ) pθ   ′ ∂xk pθ    −  pθ  ∂xk pθ   ′p2θ   ′
                                                                           −∞
                                      = −EX ∼    pθ    [(∂xk  ln pθ   ′ ) ((∂xk  ln pθ  )  −  (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ ))]
                                      = EX ∼    pθ    [   (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  −  (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ ) (∂xk  ln pθ  )]      .

Notice  that  in  the  second  line  we  use  the  fact  that  the  boundary  term  arising  from  the  integration
by  parts  is  null.  While  we  have  checked  analytically  that  this  is  the  case  for  our  neural  network
ansatz,  there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  this  will  also  be  the  case  for  arbitrary  ansätze.  However,
even  if  it  was  non  zero,  one  could  compute  it  without  increasing  the  computational  complexity
of  the  overall  algorithm.  Regarding  the  second  therm,  we  have                                                                                            3
                                              [     ∂ 2xk pθ]    ∫                   ∫
                                  EX ∼    pθ       pθ        =     d(X \{xk })          dxk ∂ 2xk pθ  (X )
                                                                 ∫
                                                             =     d(X \{xk }) [∂xk pθ  (X )]+∞−∞          = 0 ,

where   we   have   used   the   fact   that   the   derivatives   of   the   probability   distribution   of   our   NQS
vanish   at   inﬁnity.   Finally,   plugging   these   two   terms   into   the   expression   of   the   divergence   we
obtain  the  desired  expression  for  the  divergence,  namely
                                       ∑A                [   (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  −  2 (∂xk  ln pθ   ′ ) (∂xk  ln pθ  )  +  (∂xk  ln pθ  )2]
        DVMC(pθ  , pθ   ′ ) =  18            EX ∼    pθ
                                       k=1
                                       ∑A                [   (∂xk  ln pθ    −  ∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2]      .                                                                                          (2.1)
                                =  18        EX ∼    pθ
                                       k=1
3.   Decisional  Gradient  Descent:  metric

As   stated   in   the   main   text,   the   metric   associated   to   a   given   divergence   can   be   obtained   by
performing  a  Taylor  expansion  on  the  divergence  around  one  of  the  two  parametrisations.  We
start   from   Eq.   (2.1)   and   expand   in   ¶   as   (¹, ¹  +  ¶)   up   to   second   order.   For   this   we   ﬁrst   Taylor
expand  ln pθ  +δ    as
                                          ln pθ  +δ   = ln pθ    + ∑       ¶j   ∂θ   j  ln pθ    +  O(¶2)  ,
                                                                       j
so  that

                (∂xk  ln pθ    −  ∂xk  ln pθ   ′ )2  = ∑       ¶i   ¶j  ×  (∂θ   i ∂xk  ln pθ  )  (∂θ   j ∂xk  ln pθ  )  +  O(¶2)  .
                                                          ij
Then  we  recover  the  Taylor  expansion  of  the  divergence  as
                                            ∑A    ∑                             [   (∂θ   i ∂xk  ln pθ  )  (∂θ   j ∂xk  ln pθ  )]     +  O(¶2)
          DVMC(pθ  , pθ  +δ  ) =  18                    ¶i   ¶j  × EX ∼    pθ
                                            k=1    ij
                                               [     ∑A                [
                                     =  1         1        EX ∼    pθ    (∇θ  ∂xk  ln pθ  )  (∇θ  ∂xk  ln pθ  )T]   ]      ¶  +  O(¶2) ,
                                         2 ¶T     4  k=1
                                               /bracehtipupleft                    /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
                                                                              GVMC (θ  )
and  identify  the  metric  GVMC(¹)  with  the  equation  given  in  the  main  text,  i.e.
                                                     ∑A                [   ∂θ   i ∂xk  ln pθ  (X )  ∂θ   j ∂xk  ln pθ  (X )]      .
                        GVMC(¹)θ   i θ   j  ≡  14          EX ∼    pθ
                                                     k=1
4.   Performance  of  Adam  vs  DGD

In   the   main   text,   we   comment   brieﬂy   on   the   performance   of   DGD   compared   to   the   standard
Adam  optimizer.  We  provide  here  a  more  systematic  analysis.  We  plot  the  energy  as  a  function
of  the  epoch  number  for  A ∈ { 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 }  and  V0  ∈ { −20, −10, 0, 10, 20 }  in  Fig.                               1.  We  use  a  log
scale  for  the  x-axis  for  clarity.  Overall,  we  observe  a  substantial  decrease  in  the  number  of  epochs
required  to  reach  convergence.  Depending  on  the  system,  this  decrease  is  by  a  factor  of  10  or  up
to  a  100.  We  also  conﬁrm  that  such  acceleration  is  emphasized  in  the  late  stage  of  convergence.
This  is  a  typical  feature  of  second-order  optimisers  [2,3].
    Our  simulations  show  two  additional  relevant  features.  First,  concerning  Adam,  we  ﬁnd  that
the  number  of  epochs  required  to  reach  a  converged  result  tends  to  increase  with  particle  number
                                                                                                                                                  4






























Figure  1:  The  same  as  Fig.  3  in  the  main  text,  but  comparing  the  DGD  optimiser  (red  solid  line)
to  Adam  (blue  solid  line).  Note  the  logarithmic  scale  in  the  x−axis.









(e.g.   as   one   moves   down   in   the   rows   of   Fig.     1).   For   instance,   Adam   converges   in   about   103
epochs  for  A = 2,  whereas  it  requires  ∼ 105   epochs  in  the  A = 6  systems.  Second,  and  in  stark
contrast   to   the   previous   observation,   the   performance   of   DGD   stays   relatively   constant   as   A
increases.   All   simulations   are   converged   within   about   102   epochs.   We   take   this   improvement
of  performance  as  a  sign  of  the  adaptability  of  our  optimiser.  This  is  another  typical  empirical
feature  of  second-order  optimisers.







5.   Neural  Network  and  Hyperparameters

We   provide   here   detailed   information   regarding   the   architecture   and   the   hyperparameters   of
our  NQS  simulations.  The  architecture  of  our  network  is  discussed  in  detail  in  Refs.  [4,5].  The
network  architecture  parameters  and  hyperparameters  are  listed  in  Table                           1.
                       Network   Hyperparameters                       Value                                                              5
                       Number  of  hidden  nodes,  H                   64
                       Number  of  equivariant  layers,  L             2
                       Number  of  determinants                        1
                       Activation  function                            tanh(x)
                       Weight  initialisers                            Kaiming  uniform  [6]
                       Bias  initialisers                              Kaiming  uniform  [6]
                       Envelope  structure                             Origin-centered  Gaussian

                                   Table  1:  List  of  network  hyperparameters.





    We  further  list  the  settings  of  our  MCMC  sampling  in  Table               2.


                           Sampling   Hyperparameters                                      Value
                           Number  of  walkers,  NW                                        4096
                           Initial  distribution  of  walkers                              N (0, 1)
                           MCMC  steps  per  epoch                                         400
                           Local  energy  clipping  constant  (Ref.  [7])                  5
                           Target  Metropolis-Hastings  acceptance  rate                   50%

                                   Table  2:  List  of  sampling  hyperparameters.





    For  each  simulation,  we  ﬁrst  pre-train  the  NQS  by  minimising  its  overlap  with  a  set  of  target
orbitals.  The  target  orbitals  are  chosen  to  be  Hermite  polynomials,  which  are  the  exact  solutions
for  the  non-interacting  Harmonic  Oscillator  case  [5].  The  initial  NQS  and  Monte  Carlo  walkers
are  identical  between  diﬀerent  optimisers  in  order  to  avoid  initialisation  eﬀects  in  the  convergence.
We  further  list  the  settings  of  our  pre-training  optimisation  in  Table              3.


         Pre-training   Hyperparameters                       Value
         Pre-training  optimiser                              Adam
         Learning  rate,  ³                                   10−    4
         First-order  exp.  decay  rate,  ´1                  0.9
         Second-order  exp.  decay  rate,  ´2                 0.999
         Divide-by-zero  constant,  ε                         10−    8
         Pre-training  loss  function                         Mean  Squared  Error  (Eq.  (20)  of  Ref.  [5])
         Pre-training  orbitals                               Hermite  polynomials
         Number  of  epochs                                   103

                                 Table  3:  List  of  pre-training  hyperparameters.





    All  our  optimisers  share  a  set  of  common  hyperparameters,  shown  at  the  top  of  Table                   4.  The
additional  hyperparameters  for  each  individual  optimiser  are  shown  in  the  subsequent  rows  of
Table   4.  In  the  cases  where  MINRES  is  employed,  we  use  the  MINRES  implementation  imported
from  the  SciPy  package  [1,8].
  Common   Hyperparameters                                    Value                                                                  6
  Damping  adaptive  interval,  T                             5
  Damping  (scaling)  regularisation  scheme                  Diagonal  shift  (Eq.  3.24a)
  Damping  (scaling)  adaptive  scheme                        Levenberg-Marquardt  rule  (Eq.  3.25)
  Initial  damping  (scaling),  ¼0                            103
  Damping  (scaling)  adaptive  constant,  É1                 (19/20)5
  Minimum  damping  (scaling),  ¼min                          10−    7
  Maximum  damping  (scaling),  ¼max                          1020
  KFAC   Hyperparameters                                      Value
  Damping  (direction)  regularisation  scheme                Factored  Tikhonov  (Sec.  E.6  of  Ref.  [9])
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  scheme                      Greedy  algorithm  (Sec.  E.6  of  Ref.  [9])
  Initial  damping  (direction),  µ0                          √103
                                                              √
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  constant,  É2                   19/205
  Minimum  damping  (direction),  µmin                        10−    4
  Maximum  damping  (direction),  µmax                        1020
  Maximum  exp.  moving  average  constant,   ¯ϵ              0.9  (Sec.  D  of  Ref.  [9])
  Preconditioning  matrix  (direction)                         ˘FKFAC   (Eq.  3.21)
  Quadratic  Model  (rescaling)                               F   (Eq.  3.11)
  QN-(MR)-KFAC   Hyperparameters                              Value
  Damping  (direction)  regularisation  scheme                Factored  Tikhonov
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  scheme                      Greedy  algorithm
  Initial  damping  (direction),  µ0                          √103
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  constant,  É2               √   19/205

  Minimum  damping  (direction),  µmin                        10−    4
  Maximum  damping  (direction),  µmax                        1020
  Number  of  MINRES  iterations,  NMR                        0,  50  (QN-KFAC/QN-MR-KFAC)
  MINRES  starting  point                                     ∆KFACn                (Eq.  3.22)
  MINRES  matrix                                               ˘F   (Eq.  3.21)
  MINRES  preconditioner  parameters                          À  = 0.75  and  » = 10−    2
  MINRES  preconditioner  matrix                              (diag(  ˘F )  +  »I )ξ
  Quadratic  Model  (rescaling)                               HQ   (Eq.  3.29)
  NGD   /   DGD   Hyperparameters                             Value
  Damping  (direction)  regularisation  scheme                Diagonal  shift
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  scheme                      Levenberg-Marquardt  rule
  Initial  damping  (direction),  ¼0                          103
  Damping  (direction)  adaptive  constant,  É1               (19/20)5
  Minimum  damping  (direction),  ¼min                        10−    7
  Maximum  damping  (direction),  ¼max                        1020
  Number  of  MINRES  iterations,  NMR                        50
  MINRES  starting  point                                     ·  ×  ¶n−    1,  with  ·  = 0.95
  MINRES  matrix                                               ˘F ,    ˘GVMC   (NGD/DGD)
  MINRES  preconditioner  parameters                          À  = 0.75  and  » = 10−    2
  MINRES  preconditioner  matrix                              (diag(  ˘F )  +  »I )ξ  ,  (diag(  ˘GVMC)  +  »I )ξ    (NGD/DGD)
  Quadratic  Model  (rescaling)                               F ,  GVMC   (NGD/DGD)

Table    4:    List    of    hyperparameters    for    all    optimiser    of    the    main    paper    with    the    common
hyperparameters  stated  at  the  top  of  the  table.  All  additional  hyperparameters  for  each  optimiser
are  stated  within  their  own  subsection  in  the  table.
References                                                                                                                                        7
 1.   Paige  CC,  Saunders  MA.  1975  Solution  of  sparse  indeﬁnite  systems  of  linear  equations.    SIAM
     J   Numer.   Anal.  12,  617–629.  (        10.1137/0712047)
 2.   Martens    J,    Sutskever    I.    2012    Training    deep    and    recurrent    networks    with    hessian-free
     optimization.  In  Neural   Networks:   Tricks   of   the   Trade  ,  pp.  479–535.  Springer.  (                 10.1007/978-
     3-642-35289-8_27)
 3.   Martens   J.   2020   New   insights   and   perspectives   on   the   natural   gradient   method.  J.   Mach.
     Learn.   Res.  21,  5776–5851.  (        10.48550/arXiv.1412.1193)
 4.   Keeble  J.  2022  Neural   Network   Solutions   to   the   Fermionic   Schrödinger   Equation.  PhD  thesis
     University  of  Surrey.  (10.15126/thesis.900505)
 5.   Keeble  JWT,  Drissi  M,  Rojo-Francàs  A,  Juliá-Díaz  B,  Rios  A.  2023  Machine  learning  one-
     dimensional  spinless  trapped  fermionic  systems  with  neural-network  quantum  states.  Phys.
     Rev.   A  108,  063320.  (10.1103/PhysRevA.108.063320)
 6.   He   K,   Zhang   X,   Ren   S,   Sun   J.   2015   Delving   deep   into   rectiﬁers:   Surpassing   human-level
     performance  on  imagenet  classiﬁcation.  In     Proceedings   of   the   IEEE   international   conference
     on   computer   vision  pp.  1026–1034.  (          10.48550/arXiv.1502.01852)
 7.   Pfau   D,   Spencer   JS,   Matthews   AG,   Foulkes   WMC.   2020   Ab   initio   solution   of   the   many-
     electron    Schrödinger    equation    with    deep    neural    networks.    Phys.    Rev.    Res.    2,    033429.
     (10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429)
 8.   Virtanen  P,  Gommers  R,  Oliphant  TE,  Haberland  M,  Reddy  T,  Cournapeau  D,  Burovski
     E,   Peterson   P,   Weckesser   W,   Bright   J,   van   der   Walt   SJ,   Brett   M,   Wilson   J,   Millman   KJ,
     Mayorov   N,   Nelson   ARJ,   Jones   E,   Kern   R,   Larson   E,   Carey   CJ,   Polat   İ,   Feng   Y,   Moore
     EW,  VanderPlas  J,  Laxalde  D,  Perktold  J,  Cimrman  R,  Henriksen  I,  Quintero  EA,  Harris
     CR,  Archibald  AM,  Ribeiro  AH,  Pedregosa  F,  van  Mulbregt  P,  SciPy  1.0  Contributors.  2020
     SciPy  1.0:  Fundamental  Algorithms  for  Scientiﬁc  Computing  in  Python.     Nat.   Methods   17,
     261–272.  (    10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2)
 9.   Martens      J,      Grosse      R.      2015      Optimizing      neural      networks      with      Kronecker-factored
     approximate   curvature.   In   International   conference   on   machine   learning   pp.   2408–2417.
     (10.48550/arXiv.1503.05671)