Spin-1/2 kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet: Machine learning discovery of the
spinon pair density wave ground state
Tanja Ðurić, Jia Hui Chung, Bo Yang, and Pinaki Sengupta
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore
(Dated: March 11, 2025)
Spin-1/2 kagome antiferromagnet (AFM) is one of the most studied models in frustrated mag-
netism since it is a promising candidate to host exotic spin liquid states. However, despite numerous
studies using both analytical and numerical approaches, the nature of the ground state and low-
energy excitations in this system remain elusive. This is related to the difficulty in determining
the spin gap in various calculations. We present the results of our investigation of the Kagome
AFM using the recently developed group equivariant convolutional neural networks – a novel ma-
chine learning technique for studying strongly frustrated models. The approach, combined with
variational Monte Carlo, introduces significant improvement of the achievable results accuracy for
frustrated spin systems in comparison with approaches based on other neural network architectures.
Contrary to the results obtained previously with various methods, that predictedZ2 or U(1) Dirac
spin liquid states, our results strongly indicate that the ground state of the kagome lattice antifer-
romagnet is a spinon pair density wave that does not break time-reversal symmetry or any of the
lattice symmetries. The found state appears due to the spinon Cooper pairing instability close to
two Dirac points in the spinon energy spectrum and resembles the pair density wave state studied
previously in the context of underdoped cuprate superconductors in connection with the pseudogap
phase. The state has significantly lower energy than the lowest energy states found by the SU(2)
symmetric density matrix renormalization group calculations and other methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Geometrically frustrated quantum magnets showed
to be promising systems for discovering new phases of
matter.1–3 Particularly interesting phases appearing in
frustrated systems are various spin liquids characterized
by long-range quantum entanglement, topological order
and excitations with fractional quantum numbers.4–7 In
addition to their importance in the context of high tem-
perature superconductivity8 such quntum spin liquids
could allow the creation of a topological qubit and have
therefore been proposed as promising platforms for topo-
logical quantum computation.9 Kagome lattice antiferro-
magnets are likely candidates to host various exotic spin
liquid states. However, despite numerous studies kagome
antiferromagnet properties still remain unclear.
Among many numerical approaches applied to study
kagome antiferromagnet properties are exact diagonal-
ization (ED),10–12 density matrix renormalization group
(DMRG),13–20 tensor network methods21–27 and varia-
tional Monte Carlo (VMC).28–39 Different studies sug-
gested so far a variety of candidate ground states.
Aside from an initially proposed valence-bond crystal
state with a 36-site unit cell,21,40–49 majority of recent
DMRG and VMC studies find spin-liquid ground states.
Whilst SU(2) symmetric DMRG calculations obtain a
fully gapped (nonchiral) Z2 topological ground state,15
DMRG calculations supplemented with additional flux
insertion indicate a gapless algebraicU(1) Dirac spin liq-
uid ground state.20 The latter is also found in the pro-
jected fermionic wave-function approaches28,29,31,35,50–53
and the tensor-network states formalism.25,54
Difficulty in finding quantum spin liquids in realistic
microscopic models is largely due to lack of adequate
computational methods. Whilst quantum Monte Carlo
simulations face still unsolved sign problem, 55,56 ten-
sor network and many variational approaches often fa-
vor particular kinds of states. Also, although DMRG
method57–60 is known to be very accurate method for
calculating properties of one-dimensional systems, diffi-
culty of obtaining reliable results with DMRG greatly
increases forD-dimensional systems withD >1. In ad-
dition, matrix product states within DMRG algorithm
are more suitable to study gapped low-entangled states
than highly entangled gapless phases.61
Moreover, it has been found that two-dimensional gap-
less spin liquid states are particularly delicate states of
matter that can be destabilized on constrained geome-
tries like DMRG cylinders.62 The ground-state properties
for DMRG cylinders can therefore be very different from
the ground-state properties for the truly two-dimensional
lattices. An important step in the direction of avoiding
possible destabilization of gapless spin liquid states in
DMRG calculations was achieved by including fictitious
magnetic fluxes in the original spin model. This flux
threading through DMRG cylinders allowed detection of
possible gaplessU(1) spin liquid ground states and Dirac
points in the excitation spectrum in the kagome and tri-
angular lattices.20,63,64
In our calculations we employ novel neural-networks
based machine learning (ML) techniques to study prop-
erties of the kagome lattice antiferromagnet since these
techniques have so far shown great promise and potential
for studying various many-body problems. An important
advantage of the ML approach is suitability for imple-
mentation ongraphics processingunits (GPUs) that have
arXiv:2401.02866v2  [cond-mat.str-el]  9 Mar 2025
2
enhanced computational capability. Namely, GPUs can
perform multiple simultaneous computations and provide
significant computational process speedup. Additional
benefit is also powerful ML optimization libraries like
NetKet65,66 and TensorFlow67 libraries.
Neural network quantum states (NQS) have recently
been recognized as powerful variational wave-function
ansätze that allow accurate representation of various
quantum many-body states. Carleo and Troyer pro-
posed an NQS ansatz based on the restricted Boltz-
mann machine neural network68 and demonstrated it
for quantum spin systems without geometrical frustra-
tion. Subsequently, NQS ansätze have later been ex-
tended to many complex many-body problems for which
the exact solutions are still not known, such as frus-
trated spin systems,36–39,69–83 fermionic models69,84–89
and topological phases of matter. 90–98 In addition to
their initial application to determine ground state prop-
erties, NQS based methods have been further developed
to study excited energy states, 76,78,80,81,84,97–100 time
dynamics of many-body quantum systems,101–103 open
quantum systems104–109 and thermal quantum states at
finite temperatures.110,111
Several recent studies showed that accuracy and
performance of the NQS based methods can be
significantly improved by restoring symmetries
in variational NQS ansätze via quantum-number
projections,73,74,76,78,84,100,112–115 introduction of equiv-
ariant models for various symmetry groups80,81,86,116–119
or transformation to basis of irreducible representa-
tions for quantum states with nonabelian or anyonic
symmetries.97,98 Equivariance based symmetrization
combined with deep neural network ansätze demon-
strated so far significant advantage in comparison to
other symmetry averaging procedures allowing high-
accuracy variational Monte Carlo calculations for highly
frustrated quantum magnets. Notably, Roth, Szabó and
MacDonald recently obtained very accurate results for
J1-J2 Heisenberg models on the square and triangular
lattices.80,81
We study the spin-1/2 kagome lattice antiferromagnet
by representing the ground and low-lying excited energy
states by group equivariant convolutional neural network
(GCNN) ansätze equivariant over the full space group
composed of transformations that leave the kagome lat-
tice unchanged (lattice translations and dihedral D(6)
point group transformations). GCNNs are very expres-
sive ansätze that can efficiently learn from a limited num-
ber of samples. This yields to significant improvement
of the achievable results accuracy within the GCNN ap-
proach combined with VMC. The GCNN and VMC ap-
proach is therefore a powerful new numerical approach
for clarifying the kagome antiferromagnet properties that
can provide a reference to check validity of the results ob-
tained with other methods.
Our numerical calculations were performed using com-
putational speedup on GPUs and NetKet,65,66 JAX,120
FLAX,121 and OPTAX122 libraries. Contrary to the re-
sults obtained previously with other methods, we find
that the kagome lattice antiferromagnet ground state is
a spinon pair density wave (PDW) state that does not
break time-reversal symmetry or any of the lattice sym-
metries. The state appears due to the spinon Cooper
pairing instability close to two Dirac nodes of the under-
lyingU(1) Dirac spin liquid found with recent flux inser-
tion supplemented DMRG approach20 and also with pro-
jected fermionic wave-function approaches28,29,31,35,50–53
and within the tensor-network states formalism.25,54 The
found spinon PDW resembles the pair density wave
state studied previously in the context of underdoped
cuprate superconductors in connection with pseudogap
phase123–127 and has significantly lower energy than the
ground state energy values obtained by other methods.
In particular, for the studied system sizes we find that the
PDW energy has≈ 1.78% lower value than the ground
state energy found by SU(2) symmetric density matrix
renormalization group calculations.15
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we
describe the GCNN wave-function ansätze and explain
wave-function optimization procedure. Our results for
the ground state properties and low-energy excited states
are presented in Sec. III. Description of the found spinon
pair density wave ground state and possible induced sec-
ondary orders within Abrikosov fermion parton construc-
tion is presented in Sec. IV. We summarize our results,
draw conclusions and discuss future research directions
in the last section, Sec. V.
II. GCNN W A VE-FUNCTION
REPRESENT A TION AND TRAINING SCHEME
FOR THE W A VE-FUNCTION OPTIMIZA TION
Deep neural networks, and in particular deep convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs), have proven to be very
powerful models for pattern recognition in image, video
and audio data analysis,128–130 with both depth and con-
volutional weight sharing playing important role in the
predictive power of these models. Convolutional weight
sharing, that is, using the same weights to model for ex-
ample different parts of an image, provides an effective
description due to the presence of translational symme-
try (up to edge effects) in most of the mentioned pat-
tern recognition tasks. CNNs therefore use significantly
smaller number of parameters than fully connected net-
works while preserving expressivity and capacity to learn
useful features. Since quantum many-body wavefunc-
tions for various lattice Hamiltonians similarly often pos-
sess translational symmetry, CNN based NQS ansätze
allow efficient representation of these wavefunctions.
CNNs can be generalized to take into account all rel-
evant lattice symmetries. GCNNs 80,81,119,131 are such
CNN generalizations to arbitrary nonabelian groups that
take into account all space-group symmetries, includ-
ing both lattice translations and point-group symmetries
such as rotations and reflections. The key property of
3
FIG. 1. Local cluster for which elements of the embedding
kernels K are nonzero. The⃗ r= (0, 0) point is the origin for
lattice sites andD(6) point group symmetries.
CNNs and GCNNs is equivariance of the convolution lay-
ers where increasingly abstract representations of the in-
put are developed by alternating convolution operations
with non-linearities. The equivariance property alone is
sufficient to specify symmetry eigenvalues. A network
(function) f is equivariant with respect to a transforma-
tionsg iff(gx) =g′(f(x)) where in generalg̸=g′ andx
and g denote the network input and a symmetry group
element, respectively.
For systems of interacting spins on a lattice, neural
network ansätze for the wavefunctions|ψ⟩ of the lat-
tice Hamiltonian associate a complex number ψ(⃗ σ;⃗ α)
with each computational basis configuration of spins|⃗ σ⟩,
where ⃗ αdenotes the network parameters:
|ψ⟩ =
X
⃗{σ}
ψ (⃗ σ;⃗ α)|⃗ σ⟩, (1)
and⃗ σ={σ(⃗ r1),...,σ (⃗ rN)} with⃗ r1,...,⃗ rN being positions
of the lattice sites. In other words, spin configurations
|⃗ σ⟩ are the network inputs, and the complex coefficients
ψ(⃗ σ;⃗ α) are the network outputs.
General GCNN architecture is described in detail in
Appendix A. For a GCNN ansatz with Nl layers and
withNf complex-valued feature maps (composed of2·Nf
real-valued feature maps) in theNl-th layer the network
outputs ψ(⃗ σ;⃗ α) are
ψ(⃗ σ;⃗ α) =
X
ˆg∈G
χ∗
g
NfX
n=1
exp
 
fNl
n,g(⃗ α)

(2)
where
f1
g = Γ
 X
⃗ r
K
 
ˆg−1⃗ r

σ (⃗ r)
!
(3)
for a set of learnable kernels or filtersK in the first em-
bedding layer that generates feature maps from the input
data,
fi+1
g = Γ

X
ˆh∈G
Wi

ˆh−1ˆg

fi
h

 (4)
for a set of convolutional kernelsW in the group con-
volutional layers denoted byi = 2,..,N l and Γ is scaled
exponential linear unit (SELU) activation function ap-
plied separately to the real and imaginary components.
We also note that using local embedding kernelsK,
obtained by restricting nonzeroK elements only to local
clusters, stabilizes the optimization procedure and allows
numerical calculations with deeper neural networks.80,81
The optimization procedure, i.e. the network training
where the network learns from the feedback from vari-
ational principle, has faster convergence for GCNN ar-
chitectures with local kernels. This is because the kernel
locality structures the representation of long-range cor-
relations and simplifies the learning landscape. Locality
in the convolutional kernelsW is imposed by restrict-
ing the kernels to the symmetry operations of the form
ˆg = ˆtˆp where ˆt is a lattice translation andˆp is a lattice
point-group symmetry operation.
In our calculations for the kagome antiferromagnet ker-
nelsK are restricted to the symmetric local cluster illus-
trated in FIG. 1. We find that choosing larger clusters
withdifferentsymmetricshapesdoesnotimproveconver-
gencenorstabilityofthealgorithm. Thesetofthecrystal
momenta related to the lattice translations and the lat-
tice Brillouin zone are illustrated in FIG. 2. Positions of
the kagome lattice sites are⃗RL1,L2,k =L1·⃗ a1+L2·⃗ a2+⃗ rk
where ⃗ a1 = (1, 0) and ⃗ a2 =
 
1/2,
√
3/2

are two primi-
tive vectors of the lattice unit cell containing three in-
equivalent sites, and ⃗ rk describe positions of the sites
within the unit cell: ⃗ r1 = (1/2, 0), ⃗ r2 =
 
1/4,
√
3/4

and ⃗ r3 =
 
3/4,
√
3/4

. Two primitive basis vectors
⃗b1 = 2π
 
1,−1/
√
3

and ⃗b2 = 4π
 
0, 1/
√
3

in the re-
FIG. 2. High symmetry points (Γ,M andK) in the kagome
lattice Brillouin zone where⃗b1 and⃗b2 are two primitive basis
vectors in the reciprocal lattice.
4
ciprocal lattice are calculated as ⃗b1 = 2π
ˆOR⃗ a2
⃗ a1· ˆOR⃗ a2
and
⃗b2 = 2π
ˆOR⃗ a1
⃗ a2· ˆOR⃗ a1
where ˆOR representsπ/2(anti-clockwise)
rotation matrix.
Our calculations have been performed with GCNN an-
sätze having 6 layers and 6 feature maps in each layer for
the kagome lattice cluster with 48 lattice sites and GCNN
ansätze having 4 layers and 4 feature maps in each layer
for the kagome lattice cluster with 108 lattice sites. In
addition to the space-group symmetry, composed of lat-
tice translations and dihedralD(6) point group transfor-
mations, the total symmetry group for the ansätze also
includes Z2 spin parity group generated byPZ2 =Q
iσx
i
for the eigenstates with Mz = PN
i=1σ(⃗ ri) = 0 where
σ(⃗ ri)∈{− 1/2, 1/2} andN is the number of lattice sites.
Irreducible representations of the spin parity group are
specified by the eigenvalues ofPZ2 which can be +1 or
−1. Total spin quantum number for an eigenvalue|ψPZ2
⟩
that is also an eigenvalue of the total spin operator can be
obtained by calculating⟨ψPZ2
| ˆ⃗S2
tot|ψPZ2
⟩. The total spin
operatoris ˆ⃗Stot =

ˆSx
tot, ˆSy
tot, ˆSz
tot

where ˆSq
tot =PN
i=1 ˆSq
i
withq∈{x,y,z}and ˆ⃗S2
tot|ψS⟩ =S(S+1)|ψS⟩where|ψS⟩
is an eigenstate with total spin quantum numberS.
Within the VMC approach variational wavefunctions
described by GCNN ansätze are optimized using stochas-
tic reconfiguration (SR) method introduced by Sorellaet
al..132–135 Details of the SR method are explained in the
Appendix B. The SR iterative update rule for the net-
work parameters is
⃗ αt+1 =⃗ αt− ∆τG−1⃗∇⃗ αL, (5)
wheret denotes iteration,L is a loss function,∆τ a small
imaginary time step that corresponds to the learning rate
and G quantum geometric tensor (QGT) metric matrix
with ∂αi = ∂/∂αi being partial derivatives with respect
to the network parameters⃗ α=

α1,...,α Np
	
.
The most common choice of the loss function in VMC
is the variational energy:
LE≡E =⟨ψ (⃗ α)|H|ψ (⃗ α)⟩
⟨ψ (⃗ α)|ψ (⃗ α)⟩ . (6)
where H is the Hamiltonian of the system. For the
kagome lattice antiferromagnet the Heisenberg Hamilto-
nian is
H =J
X
⟨i,j⟩
⃗Si·⃗Sj, (7)
where the exchange couplingJ >0 and⟨i,j⟩ denotes all
possible nearest-neighboring (NN) pairs of the kagome
latticesitesandthespin 1/2operators ˆ⃗Si = 1
2 (ˆσx, ˆσy, ˆσz)
can be written in terms of the Pauli matrices ˆσi with
i∈{x,y,z}.
Eq. (5) is however ill-conditioned, meaning that a
small error in the energy gradients may cause a large
error in the parameter updates. Also the QGT matrix
G can be non-invertible. TheG matrix regularization is
therefore required to stabilize calculations and to achieve
reliable convergence. We find that adding both a scale-
invariant shiftϵ1 and a constant shiftϵ2 to diagonal en-
tries
Gii→Gii +ϵ1Gii +ϵ2 (8)
provides suitable regularization at the later stages of
the calculations when the variational energy is relatively
close to the ground state energy. However, the mentioned
regularization scheme is often unstable at the beginning
of the network training, exhibiting run-away-like insta-
bilities typical for non-stoquastic quantum Hamiltonians
withruggedvariationalmanifoldlandscape. 79 ForGCNN
architectures similar behavior was previously noticed in
studies of the frustratedJ1-J2 model.80,81
The instability problem at the initial stages of the
training can be remedied by modifying considered loss
function, thatisbyreshapingtheoptimizationlandscape,
as it was demonstrated in several recent studies consider-
ing other complex models.80,81,136–139 Adding a pseudo-
entropy reward term with an effective temperatureT to
the energy loss function encourages more even sampling
of the Hilbert space and leads to the total loss function:
LF≡F =E−TS, (9)
corresponding to free energy at the temperatureT where
the entropy is defined as80,81,136–139
S =−
X
⃗ σ
|ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α)|2
P
⃗σ′|ψ

⃗σ′,⃗ α

|2
log |ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α)|2
P
⃗σ′|ψ

⃗σ′,⃗ α

|2
, (10)
and ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α) is an unnormalized neural-network ansatz
wavefunction. Within this approach the effective tem-
perature is set to some initial T = T0 at the start of
the training and then gradually lowered to zero as the
training proceeds according to a schedule functionTn for
the effective temperature in then-th training step. As
explained in Appendix B, minimizing free energy corre-
sponds to minimizing Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
that measures the closeness between two distributions.
In our kagome lattice antiferromagnet study, the func-
tion Tn of the form Tn = T0e−λn, with T0 = 0.5 and
λ = 0.02 most effectively solves the problem with ini-
tial instabilities for a range of random initial parame-
ter values. We however note that for larger lattice sizes
we still find residual instabilities for some initial random
parameter values that are prone to the instabilities and
lead to unstable trajectories in the network parameters
manifold. In such cases the optimization procedure is
restarted with different random initial parameter values
that lead to stable trajectories.
We also note that some trajectories on the parame-
ter manifold remain in landscape saddles (local minima)
that correspond to different physical state than the low-
est energy state in particular symmetry sector. Different
5
trajectoriesontheparametermanifoldfordifferentinitial
parametervaluesareirrelevantprovidedthatthefinalop-
timized network parameters represent the same quantum
state. Appearance of trajectories with final parameters
corresponding to local minima with different energy is
an indication of a rugged underlying optimization land-
scape. Such trajectories reflect presence of saddles in the
optimization landscape that are located in deep valleys
separated by high energy barriers that are very difficult
for the algorithm to overcome.
An additional signature of such highly complex op-
timization landscape is also drastically different perfor-
mance of different optimizers, for example stochastic gra-
dient descent, Adam,140 and SR132–135 optimizers. In
initial stages of our calculations we also tried to ap-
ply Adam algorithm to optimize energy loss function,
however SR optimization yielded more accurate results.
Such behaviour is further confirmation that frustrated
non-stochastic character of the studied quantum Hamil-
tonian, that implies number of constraints on the ground
state that minimizes energy, also implies a rugged energy
landscape with many curved landscape saddles placed in
deep valleys. The GCNN simplification of the optimiza-
tion landscape is based on the fact that introduction of
equivariance in the neural network ansatz, and projection
on a particular irreducible representation of the relevant
symmetry group that corresponds to the symmetry prop-
erties of the ansatz wavefunction, eliminates some of the
local minima from the optimization landscape resulting
in simplified and less rugged landscape.
The sum in Eq. (9) is over all basis states⃗ σand at
large values ofT at the beginning of the training the net-
work tries to first learn states with similar amplitudes for
all basis states. In addition to the training stabilization,
this pre-training of the phases also significantly increases
achievable results accuracy which is consistent with find-
ings in several previous neural network studies.75,80
Within the optimization procedure we take relatively
large learning rate (imaginary time step)∆τ = 0.05 in
Eq.(5) andNs = 212 or 213 Monte Carlo samples in each
training step for the clusters with 48 and 108 lattice sites
respectively. The number of samples is taken to be the
maximum number allowed by the available GPU memory
restrictions, since training with more samples helps the
GCNN ansatz to learn the wave function representations
that have better generalization properties to the parts
of the Hilbert space that were not sampled. Although
larger learning rates can cause non-monotonic behavior
of the loss function and evaluated energy values as the
training proceeds, it helps the algorithm to escape from
local minima and leads to higher accuracy for the final
results.
We also find noticeable sensitivity of the algorithm to
the choice of the QGT regularization parametersϵ1 and
ϵ2 in Eq.(8). In our calculations ϵ1 and ϵ2 values are
taken to beϵ1 = 0.001 and ϵ2 = 0.001. We note that
taking larger values of the regularization parameter can
cause decrease of the obtained results accuracy which is
related to the loss function symmetry breaking due to a
weak regularizer. When a loss function is invariant under
acontinuoussymmetryithasamanifoldofequivalentde-
generate minima. Any of these minima is then a valid so-
lution to the optimization problem. The minima degen-
eracy is however lifted by introducing a small symmetry
breaking term like a weak regularizer and the model then
prefers one minimum over all other minima. Symmetries
can be broken either explicitly due to an additional reg-
ularization term or spontaneously by couplings between
the model parameters resulting in a slow convergence af-
ter initial fast decrease of the loss function value.141
III. LOW-L YING ENERGY ST A TES AND
GROUND ST A TE PROPER TIES
In this section we present results for the ground state
properties and low-lying eigenstates in the energy spec-
trum for the kagome lattice antiferromagnet clusters with
48 (4× 4× 3) and 108 (6× 6× 3) lattice sites with pe-
riodic boundary conditions. It is important to note that
results for the 108 lattice sites are of particular impor-
tance since in that case all high symmetry points are
present in the lattice Brillouin zone shown in FIG. 2.
The space group forN1×N2× 3 kagome lattice clusters
with N1 = N2 = L and periodic boundary conditions
contains 12×L2 symmetry operations obtained by com-
bining L2 lattice translations and 12 D(6) point group
symmetries (rotations and reflections). The space group
irreducible representations are usually constructed and
described in terms of a set of symmetry related crys-
tal momenta called star, and a subgroup of the point
group called little group that leaves these symmetry re-
lated crystal momenta invariant,142 as illustrated in FIG.
3 for Γ and M high symmetry points shown in FIG. 2.
To check the accuracy of the GCNN and VMC ap-
proach we first calculate the ground state energy and
singlet and triplet energy gaps for 48 sites kagome lattice
cluster. The singlet excitation gap ∆s = E1(S = 0)−
E0(S = 0) is defined as energy difference of the two low-
est energy states in the total spinS = 0 sector, whilst the
triplet spin excitation gap∆t =E0(S = 1)−E0(S = 0)
can be obtained as energy difference of the lowest energy
states in the total spinS = 1 and S = 0 sectors.
First the ground state energy is found by minimizing
the free energy loss (Eq. (9)) with fully symmetric wave-
function ansatz and spin parityPZ2 = 1 using SR op-
timization algorithm. Low-lying excited states are then
determined using minimization of the energy loss func-
tion (6) with help of the transfer learning scheme, viz.,
the scheme to stabilize and expedite training within SR
optimization for the lowest energy states in different sym-
metry sectors by choosing the GCNN ansätze for those
states to have the same architecture as for the ground
state. The optimized ground state parameters are used
as initial guess for the parameters of the ansätze. The
ansätze therefore have the same number of layers and
6
FIG. 3. Group elements of the kagome lattice little group for
the crystal momentum (a)⃗ q= (0, 0) (Γ high symmetry point
in the kagome lattice Brillouin zone) and (b)⃗ q= (π,π/
√
3)
(M high symmetry point in the kagome lattice Brillouin zone)
andcorrespondingirreduciblerepresentationcharacters. Here
R is (anticlockwise) π/3 rotation around the center of the
hexagonal plaquette andτ is reflection about the line with
angle (a) zero and (b)−π/3 with respect to thex-axis. The
little group is a subgroup of the kagome lattice point group
D(6) that leaves the crystal momentum invariant.
the same number of features in each layer as the ground
state ansatz, but with different space group irreducible
representation characters that reflect symmetry proper-
ties of a particular low-lying energy state. The ansätze
can in general also have different spin parityPZ2 equal
to 1 or−1. Within this approach initial guess for a par-
ticular low-lying energy state wave function already has
low variational energy and typical correlations charac-
teristic for the low-energy eigenstates, resulting in more
stable training yielding more accurate results for the en-
ergy eigenvalues.
The energiesE =⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩/⟨ψ|ψ⟩ obtained for 48 lat-
tice sites (4× 4× 3 cluster) with periodic boundary con-
ditions at each training step with the free energy loss
(Eq. (9)) are shown in FIG. 4 and converged energy
values correspond to eigenvalues for the studied low en-
ergy states. The results demonstrate that GCNN ap-
proach with the ansatz composed of only 6 layers and
with 6 features in each layer already allows the ground
state energy accuracy with the relative errorR of order
10−3 with respect to the ED result (R = (EGCNN
χ0
0
−
EED
χ0
0
)/EED
χ0
0
≈ 0.3% with EED
χ0
0
= −21.057787063 and
EGCNN
χ0
0
=−21.00± 0.01). As for the ground state, the
result for the first higher energy state above the ground
state in the totalS = 0 sector clearly demonstrates abil-
ity of the algorithm to escape local minima and slow
convergence due to a weak breaking of the continuous
SU(2) symmetry. Obtained value of the singlet energy
gap ∆GCNN
s = 0.03± 0.01 is in good agreement with the
ED result ∆ED
s = 0.021217.
For the symmetry sector containing the lowest energy
eigenstate with the totalS = 1 the algorithm however
finds a low energy local minimum corresponding to a
total S = 0 eigenstate with two triplon (S = 1 ) ex-
citations forming a singlet. If triplons are formed by
pairs of spins at sites (i,j ) and (k,l ), a spin parity
PZ2 =−1 wavefunction will contain terms of the form
∝ (|↑ i↑j↓k↓l⟩−|↓ i↓j↑k↑l⟩N|ψ⟩singlets. The nature of
the found local minima can be seen by calculating the
energy gap ∆ = EGCNN
χ0
1
−EGCNN
χ0
0
≈ 0.36± 0.01. It is
approximately twice the triplet energy gap obtained by
ED calculations ∆ED
t = 0.168217. ∆GCNN
t value how-
ever is 4− 10% higher value than ∆ED
t , which reflects
0 5000 15 000 25 000 30 000
-20.
-20.2
-20.4
-20.6
-20.8
-21.
Iteration
E
Γ, χ0, PZ2
= 1
Γ, χ2, PZ2= 1
M, χ2, PZ2= -1
M, χ3, Stot
z = -1
ED
N=48
FIG. 4. Low energy eigenstates for the kagome lattice cluster
with 48 sites (4× 4× 3 cluster) and periodic boundary condi-
tions. The ground state energy that is in the totalSz = 0 sec-
tor (brown line graph) and the shown higher energy eigenstate
in theSz
tot =−1 sector (purple line graph) are obtained with
SR minimization of the free energy loss defined in Eq. (9).
The higher energy eigenstates in theSz
tot = 0 sector (green
and blue line graphs) are obtained with SR minimization of
the energy loss function defined in Eq. (6) and with help of
the transfer learning scheme described in the main text. The
GCNN ansätze for the eigenstates have 6 layers and 6 features
in each layer. The space-group characters for the higher en-
ergy eigenstates in the totalSz = 0 sector correspond to the
space-group characters of the first higher energy state above
the ground state in the totalS = 0 sector (green line graph)
and to the lowest energy state in the totalS = 1 sector (blue
line graph). The red, blue, green and purple lines denote cor-
responding ED results.10 For the ground and the first higher
energy state in the totalS = 0 sector the SR algorithm finds
global energy minima. In the symmetry sector of the lowest
S = 1 eigenstate the SR algorithm finds a local minimum
corresponding to two triplons (S = 1 excitations) forming a
total S = 0 eigenstate (dashed blue line). This finding re-
flects spinon Cooper pairing instability explained further in
the main text. For theStot
z =−1 sector the algorithm finds
a local minimum that corresponds to three triplons (dashed
purple line) and provides a better estimate for the triplet en-
ergy gap.
7
0 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 50 000 60 000
-48
-46
-44
-42
-40
Iteration
E
(a)
N=108
, 2, PZ2= 1
M, 2, PZ2= -1
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10 000
-48.0
-47.5
-47.0
-46.5
-46.0
-45.5
-45.0
Iteration
E
(b)
M, 0, PZ2= -1
M, 1, PZ2= -1
M, 3, PZ2= -1
SU(2) DMRG
N=108
FIG. 5. Low energy eigenstates for the kagome lattice clus-
ter with 108 sites (6× 6× 3 cluster) and periodic boundary
conditions. The GCNN ansätze for the eigenstates have 4
layers and 4 features in each layer. Fully symmetric state
(brown line graph in FIG. (a)) is obtained with SR mini-
mization of the free energy loss defined in Eq. (9) and other
eigenstates in FIG. (a) and FIG. (b) with SR minimization
of the energy loss function (6) and with help of the trans-
fer learning scheme described in the main text. The red line
denotes SU(2) symmetric DMRG result for the ground state
energy (EDMRG
0 =−47.33964).15 Contrary to the result for
the 48 lattice sites cluster, for larger 108 lattice sites clus-
ter the ground state has nonzero crystal momentum corre-
sponding to theM high symmetry point in the kagome lat-
tice Brillouin zone. Converged ground state energy value ob-
tained with SR minimization (purple line graph in FIG. (b)),
EGCNN =−48.18(0), has significantly lower energy than the
ground state energy obtained with SU(2) symmetric DMRG
calculations. Obtained values for the higher energy states
are 47.01(7),−47.29(3),−47.54(4),−47.81(8) and−47.85(5)
(green, brown, cyan, yellow and blue line graphs, respec-
tively).
either a more complicated sign structure of the higher
energy states or presence of a weak repulsive interaction
between the quasiparticles. We also note that for the
random initial coefficients of the GCNN ansätze for the
higher energy states the SR algorithm either becomes un-
stable or finds a local minimum with significantly higher
energy. As it will be demonstrated further, presence of
such strong local minimum reflects instability towards
spinon Cooper pair creation in the same symmetry sec-
tor for larger system sizes where described eigenstate be-
comes global minimum within the symmetry sector.
To obtain a better estimate for the triplet energy gap
we have also considered the totalSz =−1 sector. For
Sz
tot =−1 the algorithm finds a local minimum that cor-
responds to three triplon excitations and provides a bet-
ter estimate for the triplet gap∆t = 0.17± 0.003.
We repeat the same procedure to find low-lying en-
ergy states for the kagome lattice cluster with 108 lattice
sites (6×6×3 cluster) and periodic boundary conditions.
These constitute the central result of our calculations.
Whilst the ground state for the smaller lattice size is
fully symmetric, we find that the ground state for larger
cluster with 108 sites is in a nontrivial symmetry sector
with nonzero lattice momentum revealing its long-range
entanglement,143 presence of Dirac points in the energy
spectrum and instability towards spinon Cooper pair for-
mation. We note that previous DMRG studies also found
indications of the possible spinon Cooper pairing insta-
bility. In particular DMRG calculations14 found that the
triplet excitations appear to be composed of two spinons.
However they could not resolve whether the two spinons
bind or not on cylindrical geometries.
Since increased number of symmetries for larger sys-
tem sizes results in more GCNN parameters for6× 6× 3
cluster, GCNN ansätze with only 4 layers and 4 features
in each layer already yield very accurate results. The
SR minimization results for low energy eigenstates are
shown in FIG. 5. The red line in FIG. 5 denotes SU(2)
symmetric DMRG result for the ground state energy.15
After finding fully symmetric state (brown line graph in
FIG. 5) with the lowest energy we have further checked,
using again transfer learning approach, if any of the low-
est energy states in other symmetry sectors for the crys-
tal momentum corresponding to theM high symmetry
point (symmetry sectors shown in FIG. 3) (b)) have even
lower energy. Our calculations found the lowest energy
for the eigenstate with charactersχ0 in FIG. 3 (b), parity
PZ2 =−1 and ⃗ q= (π,π/
√
3) (purple line graph in FIG.
5) The obtained ground state energyE0 =−48.18(0) is
≈ 1.78% lower than the ground state energy obtained
with DMRG calculations (EDMRG
0 =−47.33964).15 We
have also verified that the eigenstates for other crystal
momenta and P =−1 have higher energy values than
the eigenstates obtained for the crystal momentum cor-
responding to M high symmetry point indicating that
the spinon Cooper pairs have center of mass momentum
⃗ q=
 
π,π/
√
3

.
The results clearly demonstrate change in the sym-
metry sector of the ground state. We propose this is
due to the spinon Cooper pairing instability close to
the spinon Fermi surface, here being two Dirac points.
The observed instability has previously been predicted
as one of the possible instabilities of the "parent" U(1)
Diracspinliquid. 144 Theinstabilityismarginallyrelevant
and it can be readily explained within fermionic parton
theory.145–147 All other possible instabilities144 would re-
sult in a ground state with zero crystal momentum, and
this allows a PDW identification of the found ground
state. Explanation of the Cooper pairing instability and
formationofthefoundPDWwithinfermionicpartonthe-
8
FIG. 6. The static spin structure factorSz
f(⃗ q) defined in Eq.
(11) for the system sizes of (a) 48 (4× 4× 3 cluster) and
(b) 108 (6× 6× 3 cluster) lattice sites and with periodic
boundary conditions calculated using optimized ground state
GCNN ansätze. The structure factor is shown as a function
of the wavevector⃗ q= (q1,q 2) where componentsq1 =n1/N1
and q2 =n2/N2 are in units of the primitive basis vectors⃗b1
and⃗b2 shown in FIG. 2 andN1 = N2 = 4 in FIG. (a) and
N1 =N2 = 6 in FIG. (b).
ory is presented in the next section.
We have calculated spin and dimer structure factors
for the found ground states to find additional signatures
of the gapless spinon spectrum and spinon pair density
wave order. The static spin structure factor
Sz
f(⃗ q) = 1
N
X
ij
ei⃗ q(⃗ ri−⃗ rj)⟨Sz
iSz
j⟩ (11)
is calculated using optimized ground state GCNN an-
sätze for both cluster sizes. We note that due to spin
rotation symmetry Sz
f(⃗ q) = Sf(⃗ q)/3 with Sf (⃗ q) =P
i∈{x,y,z}Si
f (⃗ q); this also holds approximately when
SU (2) symmetry is only weakly broken. The wavevector
⃗ q= (q1,q 2) components q1 = n1/N1 and q2 = n2/N2
are in units of two primitive basis vectors ⃗b1 and ⃗b2
shown in FIG. 2 withni ={0,...,N i− 1} for i∈ 1, 2
and 3×N1×N2 =N being the number of lattice sites.
The results are shown in FIG. 6 forN = 48 andN = 108
sites clusters. We note that since the unit cell contains
three atoms the structure factor is is not invariant under
reciprocal lattice vector shifts. To fully describe correla-
tions between all spins we calculate the structure fac-
tor in the extended Brillouin zone with 0 ≤ q1 ≤ 2
and 0 ≤ q2 ≤ 2. At large |⃗ q| the spectral weight is
concentrated around the edge of the extended Brillouin
zone with broad response and not very sharp or pro-
nounced maxima, corresponding to the results obtained
with DMRG15 and projected fermionic wave-function53
approaches. Whilst for the 48 sites cluster maxima are
located at (q1,q 2) = (0, 1), (1, 0) and (1, 1), for the 108
sites cluster maxima are found close to the M-points of
the extended Brillouin zone and the structure factor has
pinch-point like features that signal algebraically decay-
ing spin-spin correlations in real space148 and gapless
spinon spectrum.
The results for the static spin structure factor clearly
demonstrate that the ground state is a disordered state.
The maxima of the structure factor do not scale with sys-
tem size; they remain at approximately the same small
value when the system size is increased (≈ 0.526 and
≈ 0.498 for 48 and 108 sites clusters, respectively) which
is in sharp contrast to the behavior of the structure factor
maxima for magnetic ordered systems. For the magnetic
ordered phase the structure factor maximum becomes
sharper and approaches delta-function Bragg peak with
the system size increase whilst for disordered phases the
structure factor maxima are broad and do not become
sharper and higher with increasing system size.
The spin structure factor, however, does not clearly
indicate the nature of the disordered ground state, since
similar structure factor results are found for both Z2
and U(1) Dirac spin liquid phases.15,53 It also does not
provide information about possible valence bond crystal
(VBC) phases. We therefore also calculate dimer struc-
ture factor
SD
f (⃗ q) = 1
N
X
i,j,k,l
ei⃗ q·(⃗ rik−⃗ rjl)D ((i,k ), (j,l )), (12)
where ⃗ rab = (⃗ ra +⃗ rb)/2 denote midpoints on each bond
and
D((i,k ), (j,l )) =⟨⃗Si·⃗Sk⃗Sj·⃗Sl⟩−⟨ ⃗Si·⃗Sk⟩⟨⃗Sj·⃗Sl⟩ (13)
is the connected dimer-dimer correlation function withk
and l being the nearest neighboring sites ofi and j.
The results for the dimer-dimer structure factor for 48
and 108 lattice sites clusters are shown in FIG. 7. For the
48 sites cluster the structure factorSD (⃗ q) does not have
very sharp peaks. The results are similar to the results
obtained for the same cluster with DMRG calculations13
with slightly higher maxima values ( maximum value
≈ 0.933). However, contrary to the DMRG results, the
overall magnitude of the dimer structure factor signifi-
cantly increases for the 108 sites cluster. The structure
factor exhibits numerous peaks, with several more pro-
nounced peaks and its maximum value is≈ 87.370. This
behaviorreflectstheexistenceofthespinonPDWandthe
secondary order parameters induced by the spinon PDW.
Since the instability towards finite momentum Cooper
pairs leads to PDW ground state only for larger system
sizes, to further study dimer structure factor scaling with
the system size, further GCNN and VMC calculations for
larger system sizes are necessary. This computationally
very challenging task is beyond the scope of our current
study and is one of our future research directions.
Before proceeding to the explanation of the found state
in the following section we briefly comment on the ac-
curacy of the obtained results, quality of the obtained
wavefunctions and the sampling scheme for both clus-
ter sizes. In general for the systems with large number
of possible competing many-body states, as it is the case
forkagomelatticeantiferromagnet, evensmallrelativeer-
rors of order10−3 in variational energy may result in the
optimized ansatz wavefunction with correlations signifi-
cantly different from the correlations of the true ground
9
FIG. 7. Dimer structure factorSz
f(⃗ q) defined in Eq. (12) for
thesystemsizesof(a)48( 4×4×3cluster)and(b)108( 6×6×3
cluster) lattice sites and with periodic boundary conditions
calculated using optimized ground state GCNN ansätze. The
structure factor is shown as a function of the wavevector⃗ q=
(q1,q 2) where componentsq1 =n1/N1 andq2 =n2/N2 are in
units of the primitive basis vectors⃗b1 and⃗b2 shown in FIG. 2
and N1 =N2 = 4 in FIG. (a) andN1 =N2 = 6 in FIG. (b).
state. Presence of large number of the competing ground
states is reflected in large number of low-lying total spin
S = 0 singlet excitations below the first total spinS = 1
triplet excitation in the energy spectrum10 that can host
such possible competing states. A relative error of or-
der 10−3 corresponds to several times singlet energy gap
for smaller system sizes.10 However, within GCNN ap-
proach the low-lying singlet states correspond to differ-
ent space-group irreducible representations with different
space group charactersχg and a small relative error for
a chosen irreducible representation reflects a small quan-
titative rather than qualitative error that would result in
significantly different ground-state wavefunction correla-
tions. We also point out that the ground state energies
obtained within presented GCNN approach provide sig-
nificantly more accurate results than approaches based
on other neural network architectures36–38, reflecting the
importanceofintroducingsymmetryequivarianceinneu-
ral network architectures.
We also note that indication of the spinon Cooper pair-
ing instability and change of the ground state symmetry
sector for the larger cluster can already be seen from the
sampling schemes that yield the best ground state ener-
gies. Whilst for the 48 sites cluster the best variational
energyisobtained bythefreeenergyminimizationwithin
the total Sz = 0 sector where the samples are gener-
ated by exchanging spins at two randomly chosen lattice
sites, for the 108 sites cluster the best results are found
by sampling within the whole Hilbert space with samples
generated by flipping a spin at random lattice site. The
ground state wave function quality can be estimated by
evaluating⟨⃗S2⟩ which ideally should be zero since the
exact ground state wavefunction has SU(2) symmetry.
For the 108 sites cluster we find⟨⃗S2⟩ ≈2.5× 10−7
confirming very high quality of the obtained ground
state wave function. For the 48 sites cluster we how-
ever find somewhat larger value of⟨⃗S2⟩ ≈0.14. The
obtained value still indicates good quality of the ob-
tained ground state wave function with only weakly bro-
ken SU(2) symmetry.80 We also note that minimization
within the whole Hilbert space for the 48 sites cluster,
with samples generated by flipping a spin at random lat-
tice site, yields better result for⃗S2 (≈ 10−7) and less ac-
curate result for the ground state energy. Moreover, such
minimization requires larger number of samples, exhibits
slower convergence and finds significantly higher energy
values for the low-lying energy states with more compli-
cated sign structures than the energies found by mini-
mization within the totalSz = 0 sector that are shown
in FIG. 4.
IV. SPINON P AIR DENSITY W A VE GROUND
ST A TE DESCRIPTION WITHIN FERMIONIC
P AR TON THEOR Y
In the Abrikosov fermion parton construction a spin-
1/2 operator at sitei is represented by fermionic spinons
fiα with α∈↑,↓:
⃗Si = 1
2f†
iα⃗ σαβfiβ, (14)
whereσ = (σx,σy,σz) are Pauli matrices. Within mean-
field theory symmetric spin liquids are obtained by intro-
ducing mean-field parametersχij and ∆ij:
χijδαβ = 2⟨f†
iαfjβ⟩, (15)
∆ijϵαβ =−2⟨fiαfjβ⟩,
where δαβ is Kronecker delta andϵα,β is the completely
antisymmetric tensor. Since the parton construction en-
larges the Hilbert space of the original spin model, the
physical spin state is obtained by introducing constraint
of one spinon per site:
f†
iαfiα = 1, (16)
fiαfiβϵαβ = 0,
where repeated indices are summed over. Within the
parton theory the magnetic excitations then correspond
to deconfined spinons and non-magnetic (total spinS =
0) excitations to fluxes (or vortices) of theZ2 gauge field
called visons.
Projective symmetry group (PSG) calculations with
fermionic partons find both gapped and gapless symme-
try allowedZ2 spin liquid states.146,147These spin liquid
statesarecontinuouslyconnectedtodifferentparent U(1)
gapless spin liquid states that in general have the follow-
ing mean-field ansatz
HU(1)SL =χ
X
⟨ij⟩
νij(f†
iαfjα +h.c.), (17)
where χ ∈ R and νij = ±1 characterizes signs of
nearest-neighboring hopping terms. DifferentU(1) spin
liquids then correspond to different spinon hopping
10
FIG. 8. Two Dirac nodes of the Dirac spin liquid (U(1) SL-
[0,π ] state), denoted here by±⃗Q. Magnetic Brillouin zone
of the Dirac spin liquid is halved (dashed lines) since it is a
π-flux ansatz with zero flux through the triangles andπ-flux
through the hexagons of the kagome lattice.
phases around hexagonal and triangular plaquettes of the
kagome lattice. VMC calculations showed that the U(1)
Dirac spin liquid state with zero-flux through the tri-
angles and π-flux through the hexagons (U(1) SL-[0,π ]
state) has considerably lower energy compared to many
other competing states.20,28,31,35,52,53,149–151 VMC calcu-
lations have also shown that all gapped and gaplessZ2
spin liquids are higher in energy compared to the parent
U(1) gapless spin liquids thoseZ2 spin liquids are contin-
uously connected to.31 The magnetic Brillouin zone and
positions of two Dirac nodes of theU(1) Dirac state are
illustrated in FIG. 8. Such state in two-dimensions has
an emergent SU(4) symmetry.
Within fermionic parton theory spin triplet (totalS =
1) excitations correspond to the particle-hole excitations
nearDiracpoints, sinceaspinflipwithmomentum ⃗ q1−⃗ q2
can be written asS+(⃗ q1−⃗ q2) = f†
↑(⃗ q1)f↓(⃗ q2). The low-
est energy inter-valley and intra-valley particle-hole ex-
citations are illustrated in FIG. 9. DMRG calculations
of the transfer matrix spectrum in theSz = 1 sector20
found Dirac cone structure for the particle-hole mode de-
noted by magenta line in FIG. 9 indicating the presence
of Dirac points in the spectrum of the kagome lattice an-
tiferromagnetic Heisenberg model. Also, for the gapless
Z2 spin liquid states found within PSG approach146,147
Diracnodesinthespinonspectrumareprotectedbysym-
metry.
Our results however show that for the highly symmet-
ric 6×6×3 cluster that contains all three high symmetry
points in the Brillouin zone (Γ, M and K points in FIG.
2) the ground state has finite crystal momentum. We
further argue that the found state is a spinon-pair den-
sity wave (PDW) state that does not break time-reversal
symmetry nor any of the lattice symmetries. This is sup-
ported by the results for the chiral order parameter and
spin and dimer structure factors presented further in this
section.
PDW state is a state in which Cooper pairs (in this
case spinon Cooper pairs) have finite center of mass mo-
mentum. The first found example of PDW state is the
Fulde–Ferrell–Larkin–Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state152,153
which appears in superconductors in the presence of a
Zeeman magnetic field and breaks time-reversal sym-
metry. It was subsequently conjectured that for sys-
tems with strong interactions a PDW could occur with-
out time-reversal symmetry breaking and was studied in
the context of underdoped cuprate superconductors in
connection with pseudogap phase.123–127 For such PDW
state the spatial average of the superconducting order
vanishes which allows the state to be distinguished from
the coexisting charge density wave and superconducting
order.
In a PDW state the mean-field parameter that repre-
sents Cooper pairs
∆∗
σ,σ′(⃗ ri,⃗ rj)≡⟨f†
σ(⃗ ri)f†
σ′(⃗ rj)⟩ (18)
is not translation invariant, that is∆∗(⃗ ri,⃗ rj)̸= ∆∗(⃗ ri +
⃗R,⃗ rj + ⃗R), where⃗R is any Bravais lattice vector. In the
context of spin liquids that would mean that∆∗
σ,σ′(⃗ ri,⃗ rj)
is not invariant with respect to combined lattice trans-
lation and gauge group transformations within the PSG
approach. Symmetries of the translation invariant states
can be classified by the point group irreducible represen-
tations (for example s-wave, d-wave or p-wave states),
properties under spin rotations in the absence of spin-
orbit coupling (singlet or triplet states), and according to
the behavior with respect to time reversal where in gen-
eral the state can be time-reversal symmetric or break
the symmetry (for examplepx +ipy state). For spinons
corresponding states areZ2 spin liquids obtained within
PSG approach.
Contrary to translation invariant states, a PDW state
exhibits spatial modulation, that has nontrivial depen-
dence on⃗R. Whilst ∆∗(⃗ ri,⃗ rj) is nonzero for a PDW, its
spatial average
∆∗(0)
σ,σ′(⃗ ri,⃗ rj) = 1
Nu.c.
X
⃗R
∆∗
σ,σ′(⃗ ri + ⃗R,⃗ rj + ⃗R) = 0 (19)
whereNu.c. is the number of unit cells, and a PDW state
is characterized by the smallest value of the wavevector
FIG. 9. The lowest energy inter-valley and intra-valley
particle-hole excitations in the vicinity of the Dirac points.
11
⃗P for which
∆∗(⃗P )
σ,σ′ (⃗ ri,⃗ rj) = 1
Nu.c.
X
⃗R
ei⃗P⃗R∆∗
σ,σ′(⃗ ri +⃗R,⃗ rj +⃗R) (20)
has non-zero value. Similar average will then also be
nonzero at wavevectorsn⃗P.
If Cooper pairs are formed between fermions (spinons)
with momenta ⃗Q−⃗k and ⃗Q +⃗k near point ⃗Q on the
Fermi surface, the pairs carry momenta⃗P = 2⃗Q. Once
such pairing occurs,U(1) gauge group is reduced toZ2.
As for nodalZ2 spin liquids (of which the Kitaev spin
liquid is a known example154) the spinon Fermi surface
of the PDW is not fully gapped; instead, it features gap-
less Dirac-like nodal points in the spinon spectrum. This
is because the gap parameter changes sign when trans-
lated for 1/2 of the PDW period. The Dirac-like nodal
points for the nodal spin liquids are known to be pertur-
batively stable as long as time-reversal symmetry is not
broken.155 We further point out that although a PDW in
general breaks lattice translation symmetry, for the spe-
cial case when PDW period is two lattice constants the
lattice translation symmetry is not broken, since trans-
lation for one lattice constant corresponds to a uniform
gauge transformation. In that case the PDW state can
occur without breaking any lattice symmetries. In addi-
tion if the Cooper pairs with momenta⃗P and−⃗P coexist,
the corresponding two component mean-field parameter
also does not break time reversal symmetry156 and has
the form
∆∗
σ,σ′(⃗ ri,⃗ rj) =F (⃗ r−⃗ r′)[ ∆∗(⃗P )
σ,σ′ ·ei⃗P⃗R +∆∗(−⃗P )
σ,σ′ ·e−i⃗P⃗R ],
(21)
where F (⃗ r−⃗ r′) is a short-range function (for example
d-wave like) and⃗R = (⃗ r1 +⃗ r2)/2.
For the obtained ground state of the 108 lattice sites
kagome cluster, the Fermi surface corresponds to the two
Dirac nodes illustrated in FIG. 8. The spinon Cooper
pairs are formed from spinons with momenta±⃗Q−⃗k and
±⃗Q +⃗k resulting in a PDW with⃗P = 2⃗Q = (⃗b1 + ⃗b2)/2.
Here ⃗b1 and ⃗b2 are two primitive basis vectors in the
reciprocal lattice (FIG. 2) and⃗P corresponds to the M
high symmetry point in the Brillouin zone. Therefore the
PDW has period of two lattice constants and does not
break translation symmetry or any of the point group
symmetries. The PDW mean-field parameter coupling
to spinons can be described with
Hσσ ′
⃗P = ∆σσ ′
⃗P
X
⃗k
F (⃗k)f†
σ,⃗k+⃗P
2
f†
σ′,−⃗k+⃗P
2
, (22)
where F (⃗k) is an internal form factor that can be, for
example,s-wave ord-wave or mixed. For the PDW with
⃗P/ 2 = ⃗Q and d-form factor Dirac points in the spinon
spectrum remain gapless. The gauge fluctuations are
gapped due to reduction ofU(1) gauge group toZ2 as
it can be seen in FIG. 5 (the state represented by green
linethatcorrespondstovisonsthatarevortex-likeexcita-
tions). Furthermore the points⃗P and−⃗P are equivalent
since they are connected by a reciprocal lattice vector
and the state does not break time reversal symmetry. We
confirm this by calculating the chiral order parameter19
χi =⟨⃗Si1· (⃗Si2×⃗Si3)⟩, (23)
where i denotes the triangular plaquettes of the kagome
lattice (i∈△ i,▽i). The chiral order parameter vanishes
for the ground states obtained for both 108 and 48 lattice
sites clusters.
We further note that a PDW can in general induce
secondary orders. Studying such induced orders has
great importance in understanding the relevance of the
PDW orders in cuprates,124,157–163 primarily charge den-
sity wave (CDW) orders and also Ising nematic, mag-
netization density wave (MDW) and translation invari-
ant charge-4e superconducting orders. For the found
ground state, the possible induced order parameters in-
clude CDW, nematic and 4 spinon order parameters,
where 4 spinon order parameter is equivalent to a charge-
4e superconducting order parameter for electrons. If
Cooper pairs form at momenta ⃗P and−⃗P, CDW or-
der appears as a second harmonic of the fundamental
PDW order and has the formρ2⃗P∝ ∆⃗P ∆∗
−⃗P with order-
ing wavevector⃗K = 2⃗P, whilst nematic ordering has the
formN∝| ∆⃗P|2 +|∆−⃗P|2. In general CDW order breaks
lattice translation symmetry whilst nematic order breaks
lattice rotation symmetry. However for the PDW period
equal to two lattice constants, as it is the case for the
kagome lattice PDW where⃗P corresponds to the M high
symmetry point wavevector and⃗P and−⃗P differ by a
reciprocal lattice vector, lattice translation and rotation
symmetries are not broken.
The 4 spinon order parameter is
∆∗(4)(i,j,k,l )≡⟨f†
σi(⃗ ri)f†
σj(⃗ rj)f†
σk(⃗ rk)f†
σl(⃗ rl)⟩, (24)
where i≡ (⃗ ri,σi). If ∆∗σ,σ′ (⃗ r,⃗ r′)̸= 0 then also some
components of the ∆∗(4)(i,j,k,l ) order parameter will
be nonzero, which can be seen by rewriting the order
parameter at the mean field level as
∆∗(4)(i,j,k,l ) ∼ ∆∗(i,j )∆∗(k,l ) + ∆∗(i,l )∆∗(j,k )
− ∆∗(i,k )∆∗(j,l ). (25)
Although the uniform component∆∗(0) described by Eq.
(19) vanishes, the uniform component of∆(4) which is
of the form ∆⃗P ∆−⃗P does not vanish. Such ordering in
some circumstances can be more robust than PDW or-
dering, as in cases when thermal or quantum fluctuations
destroy PDW order however not charge-4e order164,165
whilst Fermi surface of gapless quasiparticles remains. In
the context of spin liquids such state would be aZ4 spin
liquid with gapped gauge fluctuations and spinon Fermi
surface.144 A Z4 spin liquid cannot be described within
a simple mean-field theory that is quadratic in terms of
12
fermion operators. Also vortex-like excitations (visons)
of theZ4 gauge field carry1/4 of the flux quantum, and
since aZ4 vison is different from its time-reversed anti-
vison with the flux−1/4 of the flux quantum, visons
in aZ4 spin liquid necessarily break time-reversal sym-
metry. We have found that all eigenstates found within
our GCNN and VMC approach have vanishing chiral or-
der parameter confirming time-reversal symmetry of the
eigenstates and indicating presence of the spinon PDW
ordering.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have studied properties of the spin-1/2 kagome an-
tiferromagnet using GCNN and VMC approach, a re-
cently developed advanced machine learning technique
thatallowsstudyingstronglyfrustratedmodelswithhigh
accuracy. GCNNs are deep neural network architectures
equivariant with respect to all space group transforma-
tions that in addition to expressivity also possess ability
to efficiently learn from a limited number of samples al-
lowing efficient neural network training and more accu-
rate solutions for the optimal network parameters. Our
study therefore provides an important step in clarifying
the kagome antiferromagnet properties and a reference to
check validity of the results obtained with other methods.
Contrary to the results obtained with various other
methods, that predicted Z2 or U(1) Dirac spin liquid
states, wehavefoundthatthe groundstateofthe kagome
lattice antiferromagnet is a spinon PDW that does not
break time-reversal symmetry or any of the lattice sym-
metries. The found ground state has significantly lower
energy than the lowest energy states found by the SU(2)
symmetric density matrix renormalization group calcula-
tions and other methods. The PDW state appears due to
the spinon Cooper pairing instability close to two Dirac
points in the spinon energy spectrum resulting in forma-
tion of spinon Cooper pairs with finite center of mass
momentum. Further examination of the found spinon
Cooper pairing instability requires calculation of the sys-
tem properties for larger system sizes. This computa-
tionally very challenging task is one of our future re-
search directions together with the formulation of an ef-
fective theory that would capture PDW formation on the
kagome lattice and possible PDW induced secondary or-
ders. Additional studies are also necessary to examine
the stability of such states to various perturbations, for
example further neighbor couplings and behavior of the
system upon doping studied previously assuming U(1)
Dirac spin liquid ground for undoped kagome system.166
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dhiman Bhowmick, Jon David Spalding,
Kathyat Deepak Singh, Yasir Iqbal, Dario Poletti, Daniel
Leykam, Wei Zhu, Shoushu Gong, Christopher Roth and
AndersSandvikforhelpfuldiscussions. BYacknowledges
support by the National Research Foundation, Singapore
under the NRF fellowship award (NRF-NRFF12-2020-
005). This work was supported by the Google cloud re-
search credits academic research grant, and Singapore
Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund
Tier 3 Grant (No. MOE-MOET32023-0003) "Quantum
Geometric Advantage". We would also like to acknowl-
edge the NTU High Performance Computing Centre for
providing computing resources, facilities, and services
that have contributed to this work.
Appendix A: Group convolutional neural networks
With a symmetry group denoted byG, input denoted
by x and transformations that correspond to the group
elements byg, a function, layer or networkf is equivari-
ant with respect to the transformationsg if
f(gx) =g′(f(x)) (A1)
for anyg, whereg and g′ do not in general need to be
the same. As illustrated in FIG. 10 invariance is obtained
if g′ is identity map for all transformationsg. In other
words, f preserves the symmetry group structure in the
sense that acting on inputs by symmetry transformations
causes outputs to be transformed by the same symmetry
elements in a non-trivial way.
For systems of interacting spins on a lattice neural
network ansätze for the wavefunctions|ψ⟩ of the lattice
Hamiltonian associate a complex number ψ(⃗ σ;⃗ α) with
each computational basis configuration of spins|⃗ σ⟩ where
⃗ αdenotes the network parameters:
|ψ⟩ =
X
⃗{σ}
ψ (⃗ σ;⃗ α)|⃗ σ⟩, (A2)
and⃗ σ={σ(⃗ r1),...,σ (⃗ rN)} with⃗ r1,...,⃗ rN being positions
of the lattice sites. Spin configurations|⃗ σ⟩ are the net-
work inputs, and the complex coefficientsψ(⃗ σ) are the
network outputs as illustrated in FIG. 11.
FIG. 10. Schematic illustration of (a) equivariance:f(gx) =
g′f(x), and (b) invariance:f(gx) =f(x).
13
For example, for a square lattice with periodic bound-
ary conditions a CNN convolutional mapping is
ψ (⃗ r) =
X
⃗r′
K

⃗ r−⃗r′

σ

⃗r′

, (A3)
whereK is an arbitrary kernel matrix that looks for and
filters patterns in⃗ σ. The mapping is clearly translation
equivariant since
X
⃗r′
K

⃗ r−⃗r′

σ

⃗r′ +⃗t

=
X
⃗r′
K

⃗ r+⃗t−⃗r′

σ

⃗r′

=ψ
 
⃗ r+⃗t

. (A4)
It can similarly be shown that several iterations of convo-
lutional mappings of the form (A3) combined with arbi-
trary pointwise non-linear functions, and therefore neu-
ral networks built from layers of such mappings, are also
translationequivariant. Atranslationfor ⃗tactsbyadding
⃗t to both input and output coordinates and shifting in-
put data and then passing the data through a number of
layers is the same as passing the original data through
the same layers and then shifting the resulting output
feature maps.
In GCNNs convolutions of the form (A3) are general-
ized to arbitrary discrete nonabelian groups. For a sym-
metry group G with elementsˆg an embedding layer first
generates feature maps from the input data
f1
g = Γ
 X
⃗ r
K
 
ˆg−1⃗ r

σ (⃗ r)
!
(A5)
for a set of learnable kernels or filters K that extract
local features from the input and Γ is a non-linear ac-
tivation function. The output of the embedding layer
is further passed to any number of group convolutional
layers denoted byi = 2,..,N l where feature to feature
convolutions are performed as
fi+1
g = Γ

X
ˆh∈G
Wi

ˆh−1ˆg

fi
h

 (A6)
for a set of convolutional kernelsW. Depth of the filters
K is one (the same depth as input data) and depth of
FIG. 11. Spin configurations |⃗ σ⟩ are GCNN inputs, and
the complex ansatz wave-function coefficients ψ(⃗ σ) GCNN
outputs.
the filters Wi equals to the number of feature maps in
the i-th layer. Here Γ is taken to be scaled exponential
linear unit (SELU) activation function:
SELU(x) =a
(
x x> 0
b(ex− 1) x≤ 0 (A7)
with a≈ 1.05 and b≈ 1.67, and applied separately to
the real and imaginary components:
Γ(x) = SELU(Re(x)) +iSELU(Im(x)). (A8)
The SELU activation functions were introduced for
self-normalizing neural networks167 since these activa-
tions generate self-normalizing properties, namely vari-
ance stabilization that helps in avoiding exploding and
vanishing gradients when training deep neural networks,
i.e. when optimizing variational wave function parame-
ters. The SELU nonlinearity moves distribution of the
nonlinearity inputs for the network layers towards mean
being zero and variance one allowing stable training for
very deep neural networks.
All Nl hidden layers are followed by theΓ activation
function. To obtain ψ(σ) in Eq. (A2) the final output
layer exponentiates complex-valued feature maps com-
posed of two real-valued feature maps, calculates sum
of these exponentiated values, and projects the sum on
a particular irreducible representation of the symmetry
groupG that corresponds to the symmetry properties of
the ansatz wavefuntion:
ψ(⃗ σ) =
X
ˆg∈G
χ∗
g
NfX
n=1
exp
 
fNl
n,g

(A9)
whereNf is the number of complex-valued feature maps
(composed of 2· Nf real-valued feature maps) in the
Nl-th layer and χg are characters of the irreducible
representation.168,169 The nonlinear activation function
before the output is taken to be identity function.
Within group theory representations are eigenfunc-
tions of the symmetry group operations. Irreducible rep-
resentations are eigenfunctions of all group operations
whilst reducible representations are eigenfunctions only
ofasubsetoftheseoperations. Eachirreduciblerepresen-
tation has different set of eigenvalues. These eigenvalues
are charactersχg in the Eq. (A9). For non-degenerate
symmetry groups where every irreducible representation
consists of one eigenfunction, characters are+1 or−1,
whilst for degenerate symmetry groups characters can
differ from±1.
Described GCNN models are significantly more ex-
pressive and yield more accurate results than standard
symmetry-averagedmodelsobtainedbyapplyingthepro-
jection formula:168,169
|ψ⟩ = dχ
|G|
X
ˆg∈G
χ∗
gˆg| ˜ψ⟩, (A10)
ψ (⃗ σ) = dχ
|G|
X
ˆg∈G
χ∗
g ˜ψ
 
ˆg−1⃗ σ

,
14
where|G| is the order of the groupG (the number of
its elements) anddχ is dimension of the irreducible rep-
resentation with characters χg. The projection sym-
metry averaging approach has been applied to various
ansatz wavefunctions71,76,78,113,115 and requires evalua-
tion of the model˜ψ for all symmetry related basis states
which can be very computationally expensive. These
models are also equivariant with respect to the symme-
try groupG which can be seen by rewriting an ansatz of
the form (A10) as an equivariant model with the output
dimension|G|:
ψg (⃗ σ) ≡ ˜ψ
 
ˆg−1⃗ σ

, (A11)
ψg

ˆh−1⃗ σ

= ˜ψ

ˆg−1ˆh−1⃗ σ

=ψhg (⃗ σ).
Within this formulation all ψg (⃗ σ) can be obtained by
evaluating the equivariant model for a single input and
symmetrization is equivalent to averaging over the model
output which is computationally preferable.
For example, for the simpler square lattice with pe-
riodic boundary conditions the projection formula (A10)
becomes familiar Fourier transform that finds crystal mo-
mentum eigenstates:
ψ (⃗ σ) = 1
Lx·Ly
X
⃗ r
e−i⃗k·⃗ rψ⃗ r(⃗ σ), (A12)
with Lx and Ly being the lattice dimensions and⃗k =
2π·(nx/Lx,ny/Ly),nq∈{ 0,...,L q− 1},q∈{x,y}. Irre-
duciblerepresentationsofthetranslationgrouparethere-
fore one-dimensional and can be labeled by the phases
ei⃗k·⃗ r.
GCNNs can be mapped to other deep neural network
models with symmetry averaging by masking filters, i.e.
by setting various off-diagonal feature-to-feature filters
(convolution kernelsW) to zero whilst keeping the input-
to-feature filters (embedding kernels K) the same.80,81
Diagonal filters are filters with ˆh = ˆg in (4) and off-
diagonal filters are obtained for ˆh ̸= ˆg. For example
translationally equivariant CNN model symmetry aver-
aged over a lattice point group symmetries can be ob-
tained by masking off-diagonal filters that correspond to
point group rotations and reflections. This model would
be more restrictive than a GCNN model equivariant with
respect to all space-group symmetries yielding less accu-
rate results.80,81,119
It should be noted that the described procedure of con-
structing the wave-function ansätze equivariant with re-
spect to a discrete symmetry group cannot straightfor-
wardly be generalized to continuous symmetry groups
like SU (2) spin rotation symmetry. Finding efficient
ways to introduce continuous symmetries is still an open
research problem with one of the possible solutions be-
ing sampling in the basis of irreducible representations
instead of spins.97,98,113
Appendix B: T raining scheme and wave-function
optimization
ThegoalofVMCistofindtheoptimalsetof(complex)
parameters ⃗ α=

α1,...,α Np
	
in an ansatz wavefunction
of the form (A2) that minimizes a suitably chosen loss
function. The standard optimization technique is the
gradient descent (GD) method within which the parame-
ters are updated according to the gradients of the chosen
loss function with the iterative update rule
⃗ αt+1 =⃗ αt−η⃗∇⃗ αL, (B1)
wheret denotes iteration,η is the learning rate (the step
size) andL is a loss function. All numerical methods
that attempt to find a global minimum using local infor-
mation for iterative parameter updates generally exhibit
problems related to the local minima in the loss func-
tion landscape and slow convergence. Various stochastic
methods are therefore introduced to help mentioned nu-
merical algorithms to escape local minima and improve
convergence, for example Adam140 and natural gradient
descent (NGD) method.170–175
In the Eq. (B1) -⃗∇⃗ αL represent directions in which
the parameters can be updated to obtain the largest de-
crease of the loss function. The parameters are adjusted
by a small step length, i.e. moved for a small distance
in the parameter space, in the direction determined by
the gradient to optimize the loss function. The standard
GD and NGD methods differ by how a small distance
is defined. Whilst in the standard GD distance is Eu-
clidean distance that corresponds to the flat metric on
the parameter manifold, NGD replaces the flat metric by
a generally non-flat metric. NGD method takes into ac-
count that changes of all parameters can not be treated
equally and that it is not always correct to define dis-
tance in terms of how much the parameters are adjusted.
Instead a change for each parameter has to be scaled ac-
cording to the effect of the change on the neural network
output distribution.
To define a new form of distance that accounts for rela-
tionships between parameters and reflects changes in the
network output distribution NGD method introduces a
metric matrixM
⃗ αt+1 =⃗ αt−ηM−1⃗∇⃗ αL, (B2)
In the context of VMC with neural networks NGD
method corresponds to the stochastic reconfiguration
method (SR),68,132–135,175 where the Hilbert-space dis-
tanced between two unnormalized wavefunctions|ϕ⟩ and
|ϕ′⟩ is given by the Fubini-Study metrics:
dFS = arccos
s
⟨ϕ′|ϕ⟩⟨ϕ|ϕ′⟩
⟨ϕ′|ϕ′⟩⟨ϕ|ϕ⟩. (B3)
Within SR the parameter updates (B2) at each iteration
t can be obtained by applying imaginary time evolution
15
FIG. 12. Schematic illustration of the imaginary time
evolution in the stochastic reconfiguration method. Start-
ing from a variational wavefunction |ψ(⃗ α)⟩ with parame-
ters ⃗ αapplication of the imaginary time evolution operator
e−δτL≈ 1− ∆τL with a small imaginary time step∆τ re-
sults in the wavefunction|ψ′(⃗ α)⟩ = (1− ∆τL)|ψ(⃗ α)⟩ (black
arrows). After each imaginary time step∆τ the wavefunction
|ψ′(⃗ α)⟩ is projected to the variational subspace by minimizing
the distanced2
FS (B3) between|ψ′(⃗ α)⟩ and|ψ(⃗α′)⟩ to obtain
new updated set of parameters⃗α′.
operator e−∆τL≈ 1− ∆τL to the ansatz wavefunction
at imaginary timeτ:
|ψ′ (⃗ α(τ))⟩ = (1− ∆τL)|ψ (⃗ α(τ))⟩, (B4)
where ∆τ isasmallimaginarytimestepthatcorresponds
to the learning rate η in the Eq. (B2). After each
imaginary time step ∆τ the wavefunction |ψ′ (⃗ α(τ))⟩
is projected to the variational subspace by minimizing
d2
FS with|ϕ⟩ =|ψ (⃗ α(τ))⟩ + ∆τ∂τψ (⃗ α(τ)) and|ϕ′⟩ =
|ψ′ (⃗ α(τ))⟩ in the Eq. (B3) to obtain a new set of pa-
rameters ⃗ αt+1≡⃗ α(τ + ∆τ):
⃗ αt+1 =⃗ αt− ∆τG−1⃗∇⃗ αL, (B5)
where the metric matrixM corresponds to the quantum
geometric tensor (QGT):
Gij =⟨∂αiψ(⃗ α)|∂αjψ(⃗ α)⟩
⟨ψ(⃗ α)|ψ(⃗ α)⟩ (B6)
−⟨∂αiψ(⃗ α)|ψ(⃗ α)⟩⟨ψ(⃗ α)|∂αjψ(⃗ α)⟩
⟨ψ(⃗ α)|ψ(⃗ α)⟩2 ,
and ∂αi = ∂/∂αi are partial derivatives with respect to
the network parameters⃗ α=

α1,...,α Np
	
. The QGT
is also often called the S matrix or quantum Fisher
matrix in analogy to the classical Fisher information
matrix.65,66,170,174,175 Schematic illustration of the imag-
inary time evolution in the SR method is shown in FIG.
12.
The loss function in VMC can for example be the vari-
ational energy:
LE≡E =⟨ψ (⃗ α)|H|ψ (⃗ α)⟩
⟨ψ (⃗ α)|ψ (⃗ α)⟩ . (B7)
whereH is the Hamiltonian of the system or free energy
at temperatureT:
LF≡F =E−TS, (B8)
where the entropy is defined as80,81,136–139
S =−
X
⃗ σ
|ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α)|2
P
⃗σ′|ψ

⃗σ′,⃗ α

|2
log |ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α)|2
P
⃗σ′|ψ

⃗σ′,⃗ α

|2
, (B9)
and ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α) is an unnormalized neural-network ansatz
wavefunction.
Minimizing the free energy loss function (B8) corre-
sponds to minimizing Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
that measures closeness between two distributions. For
a statistical physics model the joint probability for spins
⃗ σ={σ1,...,σ N} follows the Boltzmann distribution
p (⃗ σ) = e−βE(⃗ σ)
Z , (B10)
where β = 1/T is the inverse temperature andZ is the
partition function and the free energyF can be obtained
asF =− lnZ/β. The KL divergence176
DKL =
X
⃗ σ
ψ (⃗ α,⃗ σ) ln
ψ (⃗ α,⃗ σ)
p (⃗ σ)

=β (F−F ) (B11)
then measures closeness between the Boltzmann distri-
bution p(⃗ σ) and ψ (⃗ α,⃗ σ) distribution parameterized by
variational parameters⃗ αwhere
F = 1
β
X
⃗ σ
ψ (⃗ α,⃗ σ) [βE (⃗ σ) + lnψ (⃗ α,⃗ σ))] (B12)
is the variational free energy that gives an upper bound
for the free energyF. Since the KL divergence is non-
negative, KL minimization is equivalent to the free en-
ergy loss (B8) minimization.
Within the VMC algorithm the quantum expectation
value of any operatorˆA
⟨ ˆA⟩ =⟨ψ| ˆA|ψ⟩
⟨ψ|ψ⟩ (B13)
can be efficiently evaluated by rewriting the expectation
value as a Monte Carlo average
⟨ ˆA⟩ =
X
⃗ σ
P (⃗ σ)Aloc (⃗ σ)≈ 1
Ns
X
⃗ σ
Aloc (⃗ σ) (B14)
with respect to the quantum probability distribution
P (⃗ σ) =|⟨⃗ σ|ψ⟩|2
⟨ψ|ψ⟩ (B15)
and estimating the average fromNs samples obtained us-
ing Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling meth-
ods that generate a sequence ofNs samples that asymp-
totically follow distributionP (⃗ σ), where the local esti-
mator Aloc (⃗ σ) is
Aloc (⃗ σ) =⟨⃗ σ| ˆA|ψ⟩
⟨⃗ σ|ψ⟩ =
X
⃗σ′
ψ(⃗σ′ )
ψ (⃗ σ)⟨⃗ σ| ˆA|⃗σ′⟩. (B16)
16
Starting from the set of kernels within all layers ini-
tialized with Lecun normal initializer that draws sam-
ples from a truncated normal distribution centered on
zero that gives correct variance of the output,167 initial
parameter values are updated within the SR algorithm
at each iteration according to Eq. (B5) with the free en-
ergy loss function described by Eq. (B8) and the QGT
regularization as in Eq. (B6). The QGT and the free
energy loss function gradient can also be efficiently eval-
uated as Monte Carlo averages. Whilst the free energy
loss in Eq. (B8) can not be efficiently evaluated from
the MCMC samples since our calculations are performed
with unnormalized neural-network ansatz wavefunctions
and the entropy in Eq. (B9) therefore can not be calcu-
lated, the loss function gradient within the VMC scheme
can be evaluated from
⃗∇⃗ αS = −
X
⃗ σ
P (⃗ σ,⃗ α) lnp (⃗ σ,⃗ α) [⃗∇⃗ αlnp (⃗ σ,⃗ α)
−
X
⃗σ′
P (⃗σ′,⃗ α)⃗∇⃗ αlnp(⃗σ′,⃗ α) ]
≈ −1
Ns
X
⃗ σ
lnp (⃗ σ,⃗ α) [⃗∇⃗ αlnp (⃗ σ,⃗ α)
− 1
Ns
X
⃗σ′
⃗∇⃗ αlnp(⃗σ′,⃗ α) ], (B17)
where P (⃗ σ,⃗ α) is the probability distribution (B15),
p (⃗ σ,⃗ α) =|ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α)|2, logp = 2Re lnψ and
⃗∇⃗ αE = 2Re[⃗f] (B18)
with ⃗f being
⃗f =
X
⃗ σ
P (⃗ σ,⃗ α)⃗O∗ (⃗ σ) [Eloc(⃗ σ)
−
X
⃗σ′
P (⃗σ′,⃗ α)Eloc(⃗σ′)) ] (B19)
≈ 1
Ns
X
⃗ σ
⃗O∗ (⃗ σ) [Eloc(⃗ σ)− 1
Ns
X
⃗σ′
Eloc(⃗σ′)) ]
and ⃗O = ⃗∇⃗ αlnψ (σ,⃗ α) the gradient of log-amplitudes.
We note that Eq. (B18) is valid for non-holomorphic
mapping ⃗ α→ ψ (⃗ σ,⃗ α) where Re[αi] and Im[αi] can
be treated as two independent real parameters and Eq.
(B18) can be applied to each separately.
Additionally correlators of the form⟨ ˆA ˆB⟩ can be the
most efficiently evaluated as covariance of the local esti-
mators for ˆA and ˆB:
⟨ ˆA ˆB⟩ = ⟨ψ| ˆA ˆB|ψ⟩
⟨ψ|ψ⟩ =
X
⃗ σ
P (⃗ σ)

Aloc (⃗ σ)
∗
Bloc (⃗ σ)
≈ 1
Ns
X
⃗ σ

Aloc (⃗ σ)
∗
Bloc (⃗ σ) (B20)
whereP (⃗ σ) is the probability distribution in Eq. (B15).
1 R. Moessner, and A. P. Ramirez,Geometrical Frustration,
Physics Today59 (2), 24–29 (2006).
2 C. Lhuillier, Frustrated Quantum Magnets, arXiv:cond-
mat/0502464.
3 B. Schmidt, P. Thalmeier, Frustrated two dimensional
quantum magnets, Physics Reports703, 1-59 (2017).
4 L. Balents, Spin liquids in frustrated magnets, Nature
464, 199 - 208 (2010).
5 L.Savary, andL.Balents, Quantum spin liquids: a review,
Rep. Prog. Phys.80, 016502 (2017).
6 C. Broholm, R. J. Cava, S. A. Kivelson, D. G. Nocera, M.
R. Norman, and T. Senthil,Quantum spin liquids, Science
367, eaay0668 (2020).
7 Y. Zhou, K. Kanoda, and T.- K. Ng,Quantum spin liquid
states, Rev. Mod. Phys.89, 025003 (2017).
8 P. A. Lee, From high temperature superconductivity
to quantum spin liquid: progress in strong correlation
physics, Rep. Prog. Phys.71, 012501 (2008).
9 G. Semeghini, H. Levine, A. Keesling, S. Ebadi, T. T.
Wang, D. Bluvstein, R. Verresen, H. Pichler, M. Kali-
nowski, R. Samajdar, A. Omran, S. Sachdev, A. Vish-
wanath, M. Greiner, V. Vuletic, and M. D. Lukin,Prob-
ing topological spin liquids on a programmable quantum
simulator, Science 374, 1242 (2021).
10 A. M. Läuchli, J. Sudan, and R. Moessner,S = 1
2 kagome
Heisenberg antiferromagnet revisited, Phys. Rev. B100,
155142 (2019).
11 A. Wietek, and A. M. Läuchli,Valence bond solid and pos-
sible deconfined quantum criticality in an extended kagome
lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 102,
020411(R) (2020).
12 H. J. Changlani, D. Kochkov, K. Kumar, B. K. Clark, and
E. Fradkin,Macroscopically Degenerate Exactly Solvable
Point in the Spin-1
2 Kagome Quantum Antiferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. Lett.120, 117202 (2018).
13 H. C. Jiang, Z. Y. Weng, and D. N. Sheng,Density Matrix
Renormalization Group Numerical Study of the Kagome
Antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. Lett.101, 117203 (2008).
14 S. Yan, D. A. Huse, and S. R. White,Spin-Liquid Ground
State of theS = 1
2 Kagome Heisenberg Antiferromagnet,
Science 332, 1173-1176 (2011).
15 S. Depenbrock, I. P. McCulloch, and U. Schollwöck,Na-
ture of the Spin-Liquid Ground State of theS = 1
2 Heisen-
berg Model on the Kagome Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett.109,
067201 (2012).
16 H.-C. Jiang, Z. Wang, and L. Balents,Identifying topo-
logical order by entanglement entropy, Nature Physics8,
902-905 (2012).
17 S. Nishimoto, N. Shibata, and C. Hotta,Controlling frus-
trated liquids and solids with an applied field in a kagome
17
Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Nature Communications 4,
2287 (2013).
18 B. Bauer, L. Cincio, B. P. Keller, M. Dolfi, G. Vidal, S.
Trebst, A. W. W. Ludwig,Chiral spin liquid and emer-
gent anyons in a Kagome lattice Mott insulator, Nature
Communications 5, 5137 (2014).
19 S.-S. Gong, W. Zhu, and D. N. Sheng,Emergent Chiral
Spin Liquid: Fractional Quantum Hall Effect in a Kagome
Heisenberg Model, Scientific Reports4, 6317 (2014).
20 Y.- C. He, M. P. Zaletel, M. Oshikawa, and F. Poll-
mann, Signatures of Dirac Cones in a DMRG Study of
the Kagome Heisenberg Model, Phys. Rev. X 7, 031020
(2017).
21 G. Evenbly, and G. Vidal, Frustrated Antiferromagnets
with Entanglement Renormalization: Ground State of the
Spin- 1
2 Heisenberg Model on a Kagome Lattice, Phys.Rev.
Lett. 104, 187203 (2010).
22 Z. Y. Xie, J. Chen, J. F. Yu, X. Kong, B. Normand, T.
Xiang, Tensor Renormalization of Quantum Many-Body
Systems Using Projected Entangled Simplex States, Phys.
Rev. X 4, 011025 (2014).
23 J.-W. Mei, J.-Y. Chen, H. He, and X.-G. Wen,Gapped
spin liquid with topological order for the kagome Heisen-
berg model, Phys. Rev. B95, 235107 (2017).
24 S. Niu, J. Hasik, J.-Y. Chen, and D. Poilblanc, Chiral
spin liquids on the kagome lattice with projected entangled
simplex states, Phys. Rev. B106, 245119 (2022).
25 H. J. Liao, Z. Y. Xie, J. Chen, Z. Y. Liu, H. D. Xie, R.
Z. Huang, B. Normand, T. Xiang, Gapless Spin-Liquid
Ground State in the S = 1
2 Kagome Antiferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. Lett.118, 137202 (2017).
26 R. Haghshenas, S.-S. Gong, and D. N. Sheng,Single-layer
tensor network study of the Heisenberg model with chiral
interactions on a kagome lattice, Phys. Rev. B99, 174423
(2019).
27 S. Jiang, P. Kim, J. H. Han, and Y. Ran, Competing
Spin Liquid Phases in theS = 1
2 Heisenberg Model on
the Kagome Lattice, SciPost Phys.7, 006 (2019).
28 Y. Ran, M. Hermele, P. A. Lee, and X.-G. Wen,Projected-
Wave-Function Study of the Spin-1/2 Heisenberg Model
on the Kagomé Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 117205
(2007).
29 Y. Iqbal, F. Becca, and D. Poilblanc,Valence-bond crystal
in the extended kagome spin-1
2 quantum Heisenberg anti-
ferromagnet: A variational Monte Carlo approach, Phys.
Rev. B 83, 100404(R) (2011).
30 B. K. Clark, J. M. Kinder, E. Neuscamman, G. K.-
L. Chan, and M. J. Lawler, Striped Spin Liquid Crys-
tal Ground State Instability of Kagome Antiferromagnets,
Phys. Rev. Lett.111, 187205 (2013).
31 Y. Iqbal, F. Becca, and D. Poilblanc,Projected wave func-
tion study ofZ2 spin liquids on the kagome lattice for the
spin- 1
2 quantum Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev.
B 84, 020407(R) (2011).
32 T. Tay, and O. I. Motrunich, Variational study of
J1−J2 Heisenberg model on kagome lattice using pro-
jected Schwinger-boson wave functions, Phys. Rev. B84,
020404(R) (2011).
33 W.-J. Hu, W. Zhu, Y. Zhang, S. Gong, F. Becca, and D.
N. Sheng,Variational Monte Carlo study of a chiral spin
liquid in the extended Heisenberg model on the kagome
lattice, Phys. Rev. B91, 041124(R) (2015).
34 W.-J. Hu, S.-S. Gong, F. Becca, and D. N. Sheng,Vari-
ational Monte Carlo study of a gapless spin liquid in the
spin- 1
2 XXZ antiferromagnetic model on the kagome lat-
tice, Phys. Rev. B92, 201105(R) (2015).
35 Y. Iqbal, D. Poilblanc, and F. Becca,Vanishing spin gap
in a competing spin-liquid phase in the kagome Heisenberg
antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B89, 020407(R) (2014).
36 T. Westerhout, N. Astrakhantsev, K. S. Tikhonov, M.
Katsnelson, and A. A. Bagrov,Generalization properties
of neural network approximations to frustrated magnet
ground states, Nature Communications11, 1593 (2020).
37 C. Fu, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Ling, S. Xu, and S. Ji,Lat-
tice Convolutional Networks for Learning Ground States
of Quantum Many-Body Systems, arXiv:2206.07370.
38 D. Kochkov, T. Pfaff, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, P. Battaglia,
B. K. Clark,Learning ground states of quantum Hamilto-
nians with graph networks, arXiv:2110.06390.
39 L. Yang, W. Hu, L. Li,Scalable variational Monte Carlo
with graph neural ansatz, arXiv:2011.12453.
40 J. B. Marston, and C. Zeng,Spin-Peierls and spin-liquid
phases of Kagomé quantum antiferromagnets, J. Appl.
Phys. 69, 5962 (1991).
41 C. Zeng, and V. Elser,Quantum dimer calculations on the
spin-1/2 kagomé Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev.
B 51, 8318 (1995).
42 P. Nikolic, and T. Senthil,Physics of low-energy singlet
states of the Kagome lattice quantum Heisenberg antifer-
romagnet, Phys. Rev. B68, 214415 (2003).
43 R. R. P. Singh, and D. A. Huse, Ground state of
the spin-1/2 kagome-lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. B76, 180407(R) (2007).
44 R. R. P. Singh, and D. A. Huse,Triplet and singlet ex-
citations in the valence bond crystal phase of the kagome
lattice Heisenberg model, Phys. Rev. B77, 144415 (2008).
45 D. Poilblanc, M. Mambrini, and D. Schwandt,Effective
quantum dimer model for the kagome Heisenberg antifer-
romagnet: Nearby quantum critical point and hidden de-
generacy, Phys. Rev. B81, 180402(R) (2010).
46 D.Schwandt, M.Mambrini, andD.Poilblanc, Generalized
hard-core dimer model approach to low-energy Heisenberg
frustrated antiferromagnets: General properties and appli-
cation to the kagome antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B81,
214413 (2010).
47 D. Poilblanc, and A. Ralko,Impurity-doped kagome an-
tiferromagnet: A quantum dimer model approach, Phys.
Rev. B 82, 174424 (2010).
48 K. Hwang, Y. B. Kim, J. Yu, and K. Park,Spin clus-
ter operator theory for the kagome lattice antiferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. B84, 205133 (2011).
49 D. Poilblanc, and G. Misguich,Competing valence bond
crystals in the kagome quantum dimer model, Phys. Rev.
B 84, 214401 (2011).
50 M. Hermele, Y. Ran, P. A. Lee, and X. G. Wen,Properties
of an algebraic spin liquid on the kagome lattice, Phys.
Rev. B 77, 224413 (2008).
51 O. Ma and J. B. Marston,Weak Ferromagnetic Exchange
and Anomalous Specific Heat in ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 027204 (2008).
52 Y. Iqbal, F. Becca, and D. Poilblanc,Valence-bond crys-
tals in the kagomé spin-1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet: a
symmetry classification and projected wave function study,
New J. Phys.14, 115031 (2012).
53 Y. Iqbal, F. Becca, S. Sorella, and D. Poilblanc,Gapless
spin-liquid phase in the kagome spin-1
2 Heisenberg anti-
ferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B87, 060405(R) (2013).
54 C.-Y. Lee, B. Normand, and Y.-J. Kao, Gapless spin
18
liquid in the kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet with
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions, Phys. Rev. B 98,
224414 (2018).
55 G.Pan, and Z.Y.Meng, Sign Problem in Quantum Monte
Carlo Simulation, TheEncyclopediaofCondensedMatter
Physics, 2nd edition, Volume 1, Pages 879-893 (2024).
56 M. Troyer and U.-J. Wiese, Computational Complex-
ity and Fundamental Limitations to Fermionic Quantum
Monte Carlo Simulations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 170201
(2005).
57 S. R. White, Density-matrix algorithms for quantum
renormalization groups, Phys. Rev. B48, 10345 (1993).
58 S. R. White, Density matrix formulation for quantum
renormalization groups, Phys. Rev. Lett.69, 2863 (1992).
59 U. Schollwöck,The density-matrix renormalization group,
Rev. Mod. Phys.77, 259 (2005).
60 U. Schollwöck,The density-matrix renormalization group
in the age of matrix product states, Annals of Physics 326,
96 (2011).
61 G. K.-L. Chan, Low entanglement wavefunctions, Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Sci-
ence, 2(6), 907-920 (2012).
62 F. Ferrari, A. Parola, and F. Becca,Gapless spin liquids
in disguise, Phys. Rev. B 103, 195140 (2021).
63 S.Hu, W.Zhu, S.Eggert, andY.-C.He, Dirac Spin Liquid
on the Spin-1/2 Triangular Heisenberg Antiferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. Lett.123, 207203 (2019).
64 W. Zhu, X. Chen, Y.-C. He, and W. Witczak-Krempa,
Entanglement signatures of emergent Dirac fermions:
Kagome spin liquid and quantum criticality, Science Ad-
vances 4, 11 (2018).
65 G.Carleo, K.Choo, D.Hofmann, J.E.T.Smith, T.West-
erhout, F. Alet, E. J. Davis, S. Efthymiou, I. Glasser,
S.-H. Lin, M. Mauri, G. Mazzola, C. B. Mendl, E.
van Nieuwenburg, O. O’Reilly, H. Théveniaut, G. Tor-
lai, and A. Wietek,NetKet: A Machine Learning Toolkit
for Many-Body Quantum Systems, SoftwareX10, 100311
(2019).
66 F. Vicentini, D. Hofmann, A. Szabó, D. Wu, C. Roth, C.
Giuliani, G. Pescia, J. Nys, V. Vargas-Calderón, N. As-
trakhantsev, and G. Carleo,NetKet 3: Machine Learning
Toolbox for Many-Body Quantum Systems, SciPost Phys.
Codebases 7 (2022); https://www.netket.org/.
67 M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen,
C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Is-
ard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Lev-
enberg, D. Mane, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C.
Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever,
K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan,
F. Viegas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M.
Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng,TensorFlow: Large-Scale
Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems,
2015 (https://www.tensorflow.org/); arXiv:1603.04467.
68 G. Carleo, and M. Troyer,Solving the quantum many-body
problem with artificial neural networks, Science 355, 602
(2017).
69 Z. Cai, and J. Liu, Approximating quantum many-body
wave functions using artificial neural networks , Phys.
Rev. B 97, 035116 (2018).
70 X. Liang, W.-Y. Liu, P.-Z. Lin, G.-C. Guo, Y.-S. Zhang,
and L. He,Solving frustrated quantum many-particle mod-
els with convolutional neural networks, Phys. Rev. B98,
104426 (2018).
71 K. Choo, T. Neupert, and G. Carleo, Two-dimensional
frustratedJ1−J2 model studied with neural network quan-
tum states, Phys. Rev. B100, 125124 (2019).
72 F. Ferrari, F. Becca, and J. Carrasquilla, Neural
Gutzwiller-projected variational wave functions , Phys.
Rev. B 100, 125131 (2019).
73 O. Sharir, Y. Levine, N. Wies, G. Carleo, and A. Shashua,
Deep Autoregressive Models for the Efficient Variational
Simulation of Many-Body Quantum Systems, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 124, 020503 (2020).
74 M. Hibat-Allah, M. Ganahl, L. E. Hayward, R. G. Melko,
and J. Carrasquilla,Recurrent neural network wave func-
tions, Phys. Rev. Research2, 023358 (2020).
75 A. Szabó and C. Castelnovo,Neural network wave func-
tions and the sign problem, Phys. Rev. Research2, 033075
(2020).
76 Y. Nomura, and M. Imada,Dirac-Type Nodal Spin Liquid
Revealed by Refined Quantum Many-Body Solver Using
Neural-Network Wave Function, Correlation Ratio, and
Level Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. X11, 031034 (2021).
77 N. Astrakhantsev, T. Westerhout, A. Tiwari, K. Choo, A.
Chen, M. H. Fischer, G. Carleo, and T. Neupert,Broken-
Symmetry Ground States of the Heisenberg Model on the
Pyrochlore Lattice, Phys. Rev. X11, 041021 (2021).
78 Y. Nomura,Helping restricted Boltzmann machines with
quantum-state representation by restoring symmetry, J.
Phys.: Condens. Matter33, 174003 (2021).
79 M. Bukov, M. Schmitt, and M. Dupont, Learning the
ground state of a non-stoquastic quantum Hamiltonian in
a rugged neural network landscape, SciPost Phys.10, 147
(2021).
80 C. Roth, and A. MacDonald, Group Convolutional
Neural Networks Improve Quantum State Accuracy ,
arXiv:2104.05085.
81 C. Roth, A. Szabó, and A. MacDonald, High-accuracy
variational Monte Carlo for frustrated magnets with deep
neural networks, Phys. Rev. B108, 054410 (2023).
82 J. Beck, J. Bodky, J. Motruk, T. Müller, R. Thomale, and
P. Ghosh,Phase diagram of theJ−Jd Heisenberg model
on the maple leaf lattice: Neural networks and density
matrix renormalization group, Phys. Rev. B109, 184422
(2024).
83 L. L. Viteritti, R. Rende, A. Parola, S. Goldt, and F.
Becca, Transformer Wave Function for two dimensional
frustrated magnets: emergence of a Spin-Liquid Phase in
the Shastry-Sutherland Model, arXiv:2311.16889.
84 Y. Nomura, A. S. Darmawan, Y. Yamaji, and M.
Imada, Restricted Boltzmann machine learning for solv-
ing strongly correlated quantum systems, Phys. Rev. B96,
205152 (2017).
85 D. Luo, and B. K. Clark,Backflow Transformations via
Neural Networks for Quantum Many-Body Wave Func-
tions, Phys. Rev. Lett.122, 226401 (2019).
86 D. Pfau, J. S. Spencer, A. G. D. G. Matthews, and W.
M. C. Foulkes, Ab initio solution of the many-electron
Schrödinger equation with deep neural networks, Phys.
Rev. Research 2, 033429 (2020).
87 K.Choo, A.Mezzacapo, andG.Carleo, Fermionic neural-
network states for ab-initio electronic structure , Nat.
Commun. 11, 2368 (2020).
88 J.Stokes, J.R.Moreno, E.A.Pnevmatikakis, andG.Car-
leo, Phases of two-dimensional spinless lattice fermions
with first-quantized deep neural-network quantum states,
Phys. Rev. B102, 205122 (2020).
19
89 G. Cassella, H. Sutterud, S. Azadi, N. D. Drummond, D.
Pfau, J. S. Spencer, and W. M. C. Foulkes,Discovering
Quantum Phase Transitions with Fermionic Neural Net-
works, Phys. Rev. Lett.130, 036401 (2023).
90 H. J. Changlani, J. M. Kinder, C. J. Umrigar, and G. Kin-
Lic Chan, Approximating strongly correlated wave func-
tions with correlator product states, Phys. Rev. B 80,
245116 (2009).
91 S.R.Clark, Unifying Neural-network Quantum States and
Correlator Product States via Tensor Networks, J. Phys.
A: Math. Theor.51 135301 (2018).
92 D.-L. Deng, X. Li, and S. Das Sarma,Machine learning
topological states, Phys. Rev. B96, 195145 (2017).
93 I. Glasser, N. Pancotti, M. August, I. D. Rodriguez, and
J. I. Cirac,Neural-Network Quantum States, String-Bond
States, and Chiral Topological States, Phys. Rev. X 8,
011006 (2018).
94 R.Kaubruegger, L.Pastori, andJ.C.Budich, Chiral topo-
logical phases from artificial neural networks, Phys. Rev.
B 97, 195136 (2018).
95 S. Lu, X. Gao, and L.-M. Duan,Efficient representation
of topologically ordered states with restricted Boltzmann
machines, Phys. Rev. B99, 155136 (2019).
96 Y. Huang, and J. E. Moore,Neural Network Represen-
tation of Tensor Network and Chiral States, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127, 170601 (2021).
97 T. Vieijra, C. Casert, J. Nys, W. De Neve, J. Haegeman,
J. Ryckebusch, and F. Verstraete,Restricted Boltzmann
Machines for Quantum States with Non-Abelian or Any-
onic Symmetries, Phys. Rev. Lett.124, 097201 (2020).
98 T. Vieijra, and J. Nys, Many-body quantum states with
exact conservation of non-Abelian and lattice symme-
tries through variational Monte Carlo, Phys. Rev. B104,
045123 (2021).
99 T. Ðurić, and T. Ševa, Efficient neural-network based
variational Monte Carlo scheme for direct optimization of
excited energy states in frustrated quantum systems, Phys.
Rev. B 102, 085104 (2020).
100 K. Choo, G. Carleo, N. Regnault, and T. Neupert,Sym-
metries and Many-Body Excitations with Neural-Network
Quantum States, Phys. Rev. Lett.121, 167204 (2018).
101 M. Schmitt, and M. Heyl,Quantum Many-Body Dynam-
ics in Two Dimensions with Artificial Neural Networks,
Phys. Rev. Lett.125, 100503 (2020).
102 I. L. Gutiérrez, and C. B. Mendl,Real time evolution with
neural-network quantum states, Quantum 6, 627 (2022).
103 D. Hofmann, G. Fabiani, J. H. Mentink, G. Carleo, and
M. A. Sentef,Role of stochastic noise and generalization
error in the time propagation of neural-network quantum
states, SciPost Phys.12, 165 (2022).
104 A. Nagy, and V. Savona, Variational Quantum Monte
Carlo Method with a Neural-Network Ansatz for Open
Quantum Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett.122, 250501 (2019).
105 M. J. Hartmann, and G. Carleo, Neural-Network Ap-
proach to Dissipative Quantum Many-Body Dynamics,
Phys. Rev. Lett.122, 250502 (2019).
106 F. Vicentini, A. Biella, N. Regnault, and C. Ciuti,Vari-
ational Neural-Network Ansatz for Steady States in Open
Quantum Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett.122, 250503 (2019).
107 N. Yoshioka, and R. Hamazaki, Constructing neural
stationary states for open quantum many-body systems,
Phys. Rev. B99, 214306 (2019).
108 D. Luo, Z. Chen, J. Carrasquilla, and B. K. Clark,Au-
toregressive Neural Network for Simulating Open Quan-
tum Systems via a Probabilistic Formulation, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 128, 090501 (2022).
109 M. Reh, M. Schmitt, and M. Gärttner,Time-Dependent
Variational Principle for Open Quantum Systems with
Artificial Neural Networks, Phys. Rev. Lett.127, 230501
(2021).
110 N. Irikura, and Hiroki Saito, Neural-network quantum
states at finite temperature , Phys. Rev. Research 2,
013284 (2020).
111 Y. Nomura, N. Yoshioka, and F. Nori, Purifying Deep
Boltzmann Machines for Thermal Quantum States, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 127, 060601 (2021).
112 T. Mizusaki and M. Imada,Quantum-number projection
in the path-integral renormalization group method, Phys.
Rev. B 69, 125110 (2004).
113 T. Misawa, S. Morita, K. Yoshimi, M. Kawamura, Y.
Motoyama, K. Ido, T. Ohgoe, M. Imada, and T. Kato,
mVMC - Open-source software for many-variable varia-
tional Monte Carlo method, Comp. Phys. Commun.235,
447 (2019).
114 K. Seki, T. Shirakawa, and S. Yunoki,Symmetry-adapted
variational quantum eigensolver , Phys. Rev. A 101,
052340 (2020).
115 M. Reh, M. Schmitt, and M. Gärttner, Optimizing de-
sign choices for neural quantum states, Phys. Rev. B107,
195115 (2023).
116 D. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Hu, Z. Zhao, V. M. Hur, and B. K.
Clark, Gauge-invariant and anyonic-symmetric autore-
gressive neural network for quantum lattice models, Phys.
Rev. Research 5, 013216 (2023).
117 D. Luo, G. Carleo, B. K. Clark, and J. Stokes, Gauge
Equivariant Neural Networks for Quantum Lattice Gauge
Theories, Phys. Rev. Lett.127, 276402 (2021).
118 M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, T. Cohen, and P. Veličković,
Geometric Deep Learning: Grids, Groups, Graphs,
Geodesics, and Gauges, arXiv:2104.13478 (2021).
119 T. Cohen and M. Welling, Group equivariant con-
volutional networks, Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2016);
arXiv:1602.07576.
120 R. Frostig, M. J. Johnson, and C. Leary,Compiling ma-
chine learning programs via high-level tracing, Systems for
Machine Learning (2018).
121 J. Heek, A. Levskaya, A. Oliver, M. Ritter, B.
Rondepierre, A. Steiner, and M. van Zee, Flax:
A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX ,
http://github.com/google/ flax (2020).
122 M.Hessel, D.Budden, F.Viola, M.Rosca, E.Sezener, and
T. Hennigan, Optax: composable gradient transforma-
tion and optimisation, in jax!, http://github.com/ deep-
mind/optax (2020).
123 D. F. Agterberg, J.C. Séamus Davis, S. D. Edkins, E.
Fradkin, D. J. Van Harlingen, S. A. Kivelson, P. A. Lee,
L. Radzihovsky, J. M. Tranquada, and Y. Wang, An-
nual Review of Condensed Matter Physics,The Physics
of Pair-Density Waves: Cuprate Superconductors and Be-
yond, Vol. 11:231-270 (2020).
124 P. A. Lee,Amperean Pairing and the Pseudogap Phase of
Cuprate Superconductors, Phys. Rev. X4, 031017 (2014).
125 S.- S. Lee, P. A. Lee, and T. Senthil, Amperean Pair-
ing Instability in the U(1) Spin Liquid State with Fermi
Surface and Application to κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3,
Phys. Rev. Lett.98, 067006 (2007).
126 X. Y. Xu, K. T. Law, and P. A. Lee,Pair Density Wave in
20
the Dopedt−J Model with Ring Exchange on a Triangular
Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett.122, 167001 (2019).
127 D. Chakraborty, and A. M. Black-Schaffer,Odd-frequency
pair density wave correlations in underdoped cuprates,
New J. Phys.23, 033001 (2021).
128 Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton,Deep learning, Na-
ture 521, 436 (2015).
129 I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville,Deep learning
(MIT press, Cambridge, MA, 2016).
130 John D. Kelleher,Deep learning(MIT press, Cambridge,
MA, 2019).
131 R. Kondor, and S. Trivedi,On the generalization of equiv-
ariance and convolution in neural networks to the ac-
tion of compact groups, Proceedings of the 35th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(2018);
arXiv:1802.03690.
132 S. Sorella, Green Function Monte Carlo with Stochastic
Reconfiguration, Phys. Rev. Lett.80, 4558 (1998).
133 S. Sorella, Generalized Lanczos algorithm for variational
quantum Monte Carlo, Phys. Rev. B64, 024512 (2001).
134 S. Sorella, M. Casula, and D. Rocca, Weak binding be-
tween two aromatic rings: Feeling the van der Waals
attraction by quantum Monte Carlo methods, J. Chem.
Phys. 127, 014105 (2007).
135 F. Becca and S. Sorella, Quantum Monte Carlo Ap-
proaches for Correlated Systems(Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2017).
136 C. Roth, Iterative Retraining of Quantum Spin Models
Using Recurrent Neural Networks, arXiv:2003.06228.
137 D. Wu, L. Wang, and P. Zhang,Solving Statistical Me-
chanics Using Variational Autoregressive Networks, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 122, 080602 (2019).
138 M. Hibat-Allah, E. M. Inack, R. Wiersema, R. G. Melko,
and J. Carrasquilla,Variational neural annealing, Nature
Machine Intelligence 3, 952–961 (2021).
139 M. Hibat-Allah, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla,Supple-
menting Recurrent Neural Network Wave Functions with
Symmetry and Annealing to Improve Accuracy, Machine
Learning and the Physical Sciences Workshop (NeurIPS
2021); arXiv:2207.14314.
140 D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam:A Method for Stochastic
Optimization, 3rd International Conference for Learning
Representations (San Diego, 2015); arXiv:1412.6980.
141 R. Bamler, and S. Mandt, Improving Optimization
for Models With Continuous Symmetry Breaking, Pro-
ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML 2018), in PMLR 80:423-432;
arXiv:1803.03234.
142 M. I. Aroyo, International Tables for Crystallography,
Volume A: Space-group Symmetry (Wiley, New York,
2016).
143 L. Gioia, and C. Wang, Nonzero Momentum Requires
Long-Range Entanglement, Phys. Rev. X 12, 031007
(2022).
144 M.Barkeshli, H.Yao, andS.A.Kivelson, Gapless spin liq-
uids: Stability and possible experimental relevance, Phys.
Rev. B 87, 140402(R) (2013).
145 X. - G. Wen,Quantum orders and symmetric spin liquids,
Phys. Rev. B65, 165113 (2002).
146 Y.- M. Lu, Y. Ran, and P. A. Lee,Z2 spin liquids in the
S = 1
2 Heisenberg model on the kagome lattice: A projec-
tive symmetry-group study of Schwinger fermion mean-
field states, Phys. Rev. B83, 224413 (2011).
147 Y.- M. Lu, Symmetry-protected gapless Z2 spin liquids,
Phys. Rev. B97, 094422 (2018).
148 D. Kiese, F. Ferrari, N. Astrakhantsev, N. Niggemann, P.
Ghosh, T. Müller, R. Thomale, T. Neupert, J. Reuther,
M. J. P. Gingras, S. Trebst, and Y. Iqbal,Pinch-points
to half-moons and up in the stars: The kagome skymap,
Phys. Rev. Research5, L012025 (2023).
149 M. B. Hastings, Dirac structure, RVB, and Goldstone
modes in the kagomé antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B63,
014413 (2000).
150 Y. Iqbal, D. Poilblanc, and F. Becca,Spin- 1
2 Heisenberg
J1−J2 antiferromagnet on the kagome lattice, Phys. Rev.
B 91, 020402(R) (2015).
151 Y. Iqbal, D. Poilblanc, R. Thomale, and F. Becca,Per-
sistence of the gapless spin liquid in the breathing kagome
Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 97, 115127
(2018).
152 P. Fulde and R. A. Ferrell,Superconductivity in a Strong
Spin-Exchange Field, Phys. Rev.135, A550 (1964).
153 A. I. Larkin, and Yu. N. Ovchinnikov,Nonuniform state
of superconductors, Sov. Phys. JETP 20, 762 (1965).
154 A. Kitaev,Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond,
Ann. Phys. 321, 2 (2006).
155 E. Berg, C-C. Chen, and S. A. Kivelson,Stability of Nodal
Quasiparticles in Superconductors with Coexisting Orders,
Phys. Rev. Lett.100, 027003 (2008).
156 F. Loder, A. P. Kampf, and T. Kopp, Superconduct-
ing state with a finite-momentum pairing mechanism in
zero external magnetic field, Phys. Rev. B81, 020511(R)
(2010).
157 E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada,Collo-
quium: Theory of intertwined orders in high temperature
superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys.87, 457 (2015).
158 E. Berg, E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. Tranquada,
Striped superconductors: how spin, charge and supercon-
ducting orders intertwine in the cuprates, New J. Phys.
11, 115004 (2009).
159 D. F. Agterbergand, and H. Tsunetsugu, Dislocations
and vortices in pair-density-wave superconductors, Nature
Physics 4, 639–642 (2008).
160 E. Berg, E. Fradkin, and S. A. Kivelson,Charge 4e super-
conductivity from pair density wave order in certain high
temperature superconductors, Nature Phys. 5, 830–833
(2009).
161 D. F. Agterberg, and J. Garaud, Checkerboard order
in vortex cores from pair-density-wave superconductivity,
Phys. Rev. B91, 104512 (2015).
162 Y. Wang, S. D. Edkins, M. H. Hamidian, J. C. Séamus
Davis, E. Fradkin, and S. A. Kivelson,Pair density waves
in superconducting vortex halos, Phys. Rev. B97, 174510
(2018).
163 Z. Dai, Y.-H. Zhang, T. Senthil, and P. A. Lee, Pair-
density waves, charge-density waves, and vortices in high-
Tc cuprates, Phys. Rev. B97, 174511 (2018).
164 E. Berg, E. Fradkin, and S. A. Kivelson,Theory of the
striped superconductor, Phys. Rev. B79, 064515 (2009).
165 L. Radzihovsky, and A. Vishwanath, Quantum Liquid
Crystals in an Imbalanced Fermi Gas: Fluctuations and
Fractional Vortices in Larkin-Ovchinnikov States, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 103, 010404 (2009).
166 W.-H. Ko, P. A. Lee, and X.-G. Wen,Doped kagome sys-
tem as exotic superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 79, 214502
(2009).
167 G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, A. Mayr,and S. Hochre-
iter, Self-Normalizing Neural Networks, Advances in Neu-
21
ral Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017);
arXiv:1706.02515.
168 V. Heine,Group Theory in Quantum Mechanics, (Dover,
2007).
169 M.S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, and A. Jorio, Group
Theory - Application to the Physics of Condensed Matter
(Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2008).
170 S.-i. Amari,Natural gradient works efficiently in learning,
Neural Computation 10, 251 (1998).
171 H. Park, and K. Lee,Adaptive Natural Gradient Method
for Learning of Stochastic Neural Networks in Mini-Batch
Mode, Appl. Sci.9(21), 4568 (2019).
172 J. Martens,New Insights and Perspectives on the Natural
Gradient Method, J. Mach. Learn. Res.21, 146:1-146:76
(2020).
173 S. Dong, F. Le, M. Zhang, S.-J. Tao, C. Wang, Y.-J. Han,
and G.-P. Guo, Generalization to the Natural Gradient
Descent, arXiv:2210.02764.
174 C.-Y. Park, and M. J. Kastoryano, Geometry of learn-
ing neural quantum states, Phys. Rev. Research2, 023232
(2020).
175 J. Stokes, J. Izaac, N. Killoran, and G. Carleo,Quantum
Natural Gradient, Quantum 4, 269 (2020).
176 T. M. Cover, and J. A. Thomas,Elements of information
theory (Wiley, New York, 1991).