    A Kaczmarz-inspired approach to accelerate the optimization of
                                   neural network wavefunctions


                               Gil Goldshlagera, Nilin Abrahamsenb, Lin Lina,c

                 aDepartment of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
                  bThe Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
 cApplied Mathematics and Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
                                                     CA 94720, USA




Abstract
Neural  network  wavefunctions  optimized  using  the  variational  Monte  Carlo  method  have  been
shown to produce highly accurate results for the electronic structure of atoms and small molecules,
but  the  high  cost  of  optimizing  such  wavefunctions  prevents  their  application  to  larger  systems.
We propose the Subsampled Projected-Increment Natural Gradient Descent (SPRING) optimizer
to  reduce  this  bottleneck.   SPRING  combines  ideas  from  the  recently  introduced  minimum-step
stochastic reconfiguration optimizer (MinSR) and the classical randomized Kaczmarz method for
solving linear least-squares problems.  We demonstrate that SPRING outperforms both MinSR and
the popular Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature method (KFAC) across a number of small
atoms and molecules, given that the learning rates of all methods are optimally tuned.  For example,
on the oxygen atom, SPRING attains chemical accuracy after forty thousand training iterations,
whereas both MinSR and KFAC fail to do so even after one hundred thousand iterations.


1.  Introduction

    Predicting the properties of molecules and materials from first principles has numerous appli-
cations.  For many chemical properties, it suffices to work within the Born-Oppenheimer approx-
imation,  in which the nuclei are viewed as classical point charges and only the electrons exhibit
quantum-mechanical  behavior.   The  study  of  chemistry  through  this  lens  is  known  as  electronic
structure theory.
    Within electronic structure theory, methods to model the many-body electron wavefunction in-
clude Hartree-Fock theory, configuration interaction methods, and coupled cluster theory.  A typical
ansatz for such methods is a sum of Slater determinants which represent antisymmetrized products
of single-particle states.  The benefit of such an ansatz is that the energy and other properties of
the wavefunction can be evaluated analytically from pre-computed few-particle integrals.
    Another approach to the electronic structure problem is the variational Monte Carlo method
(VMC)  [1,  2].   In  VMC,  the  properties  of  the  wavefunction  are  calculated  using  Monte  Carlo
sampling rather than direct numerical integration, and the energy is variationally minimized through
a stochastic optimization procedure.  This increases the cost of the calculations,  especially when
high accuracy is required, but it enables the use of much more general ansatzes.  Traditionally, these
ansatzes included Slater-Jastrow wavefunctions and Slater-Jastrow-backflow wavefunctions [1].





Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                                              August 27, 2024
    In recent decades the modeling of very high-dimensional data and functions has seen impres-
sive progress through the use of neural networks.  For the quantum chemistry problem, the high-
dimensional  quantum  wavefunction  can  be  modeled  by  combining  several  neural  network  layers
with a determinantal layer that enforces the Fermionic antisymmetry [3, 4].  Such neural network
wavefunctions, optimized using the variational Monte Carlo method, have enabled near-exact com-
putation  of  the  ground-state  energy  for  small  molecules  [5,  6,  7]  and  certain  condensed  matter
systems [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
    Due  to  the  large  number  of  parameters  and  the  highly  nonlinear  nature  of  neural  networks,
the  optimization  of  neural  network  wavefunctions  poses  a  significant  challenge.   Prior  to  neural
network wavefunctions,  VMC simulations typically relied on powerful domain-specific optimizers
such  as  stochastic  reconfiguration  (SR)  [13,  14,  15]  and  the  linear  method  [16,  17,  18,  19,  20].
These optimizers are able to converge in only tens or hundreds of iterations using highly accurate
gradient  estimates  based  on  millions  or  more  Monte  Carlo  samples.   However,  when  applied  to
a wavefunction with Np  parameters,  they require solving either a linear system or a generalized
eigenvalue  problem  involving  a  dense Np×Np  matrix  known  as  the S  matrix,  with  a  cost  that
is O(N3p )  in  general.   The  recently  proposed  Rayleigh-Gauss-Newton  optimizer  [21]  presents  a
potentially favorable intermediate point between stochastic reconfiguration and the linear method,
but still incurs a similar computational cost.
    Since high-accuracy neural network architectures for molecules typically involve at least hun-
dreds of thousands of parameters, it is not possible to directly apply SR or the linear method in this
context.  Instead, molecular neural network wavefunctions are typically optimized using methods
from the machine learning community.  These methods have a low per-iteration cost and require
only a small number of Monte Carlo samples per iteration (or in machine learning parlance, a small
minibatch size).  However, they can require hundreds of thousands of optimization steps to converge
fully.
    For  the  FermiNet  and  related  architectures  [3,  6,  12,  5],  the  most  popular  optimizer  is  the
Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature method (KFAC) [22].  KFAC was originally designed
as a tractable approximation to natural gradient descent (NGD) [23] for machine learning models
with  millions  of  parameters.   In  the  quantum  setting,  natural  gradient  descent  is  equivalent  to
stochastic reconfiguration since theS matrix can be viewed as the Fisher information matrix of the
normalized probability distribution defined by the wavefunction [3].  Taking the view of stochastic
reconfiguration, the key ingredient of KFAC is an approximate factorization of the S matrix.  This
factorization enables the efficient inversion of the approximate S matrix and also makes it possible
to approximateS based on multiple recent minibatches.  This can significantly improve performance
in highly stochastic settings where a single minibatch can provide only a very noisy approximation
to the trueS matrix.  It is worth noting that the interpretation of KFAC as an approximate natural
gradient method has recently been called into question due to some experiments which show that
KFAC  performs  better  than  exact  natural  gradient  updates  [24].   Regardless  of  the  underlying
mechanism, KFAC represents the state-of-the-art in optimizing neural network wavefunctions for
molecules and solids.
    An alternative to KFAC is to take advantage of the fact that the estimate of the S  matrix is
always low-rank when it is based on only a small set of Monte Carlo samples.  This idea was first
introduced in the machine learning community in the form of efficient subsampled natural gradient
descent [25].  In the physics community, several recent works have proposed similar methods for the
VMC setting [26, 27].  These methods make fewer heuristic assumptions than KFAC and are much
simpler to describe and implement.  However, unlike KFAC, they are limited to estimating the S


                                                             2
matrix based on only a single minibatch at a time.
    In this work, we improve upon these existing optimizers with a new method that we call Sub-
sampled Projected-Increment Natural Gradient Descent (SPRING). Our method is most directly
inspired by the minimum-step stochastic reconfiguration (MinSR) approach of Chen and Heyl [26].
MinSR is based on the observation that the SR parameter update can be formulated as the solu-
tion to an overdetermined linear least-squares problem.  At each iteration, the Monte Carlo samples
provide access to a small set of rows from this least-squares problem, yielding an underdetermined
subproblem which has many possible solutions.  To make the parameter update unique, Chen and
Heyl propose to choose the minimal-norm solution to the sampled subproblem.
    We  improve  upon  this  scheme  by  taking  inspiration  from  the  randomized  Kaczmarz  method
for solving overdetermined linear least-squares problems [28].  The original randomized Kaczmarz
method solves the problem by sampling a single row at a time.  The subsequently developed block
version of the method (see i.e.  [29]) instead uses a small set of rows at each iteration.  In either
case,  the key idea of the Kaczmarz method is to iteratively project the solution vector onto the
hyperplane of solutions to each sampled subproblem.  When the system is consistent and the rows
are sampled from an appropriate probability distribution, this approach provably converges to the
true solution with an expected error that decays by a constant factor at each iteration.
    Recall that the SR parameter update can be formulated as the solution to an overdetermined
linear least-squares problem, and that each minibatch of Monte Carlo samples provides access to a
randomly sampled underdetermined subproblem.  In direct analogy to the Kaczmarz method, the
parameter update in SPRING is calculated by projecting the previous  parameter update onto the
hyperplane of solutions to the newly sampled subproblem.  By leveraging the previous parameter
update as the starting point for the projection, SPRING is able to use data from previous mini-
batches to obtain a more accurate approximation to the true SR update direction.  Furthermore,
this improvement is obtained at essentially no extra cost relative to MinSR.
    To demonstrate the effectiveness of SPRING, we apply it to optimize a FermiNet wavefunction
for several small atoms and molecules, namely the carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen atoms, two config-
urations of the N2 molecule, and the CO molecule at equilibrium.  We use the VMCNet code [30] for
all numerical experiments.  We find that SPRING consistently outperforms MinSR and KFAC when
all three methods have their learning rates tuned for maximal performance.  Remarkably, on the
oxygen atom, SPRING is able to attain chemical accuracy after forty thousand training iterations,
whereas both MinSR and KFAC fail to do so even after one hundred thousand iterations.


2.  Background

2.1.  Variational Monte Carlo
    In this work we focus on the application of the variational Monte Carlo method to find ground-
state wavefunctions for molecular systems.  A molecule is defined by the positions RI  and charges
ZI  of M  atomic nuclei.  Using the Born-Oppenheimer approximation [31], we model the nuclei as
fixed point charges.  The quantum system of interest then consists of N  electrons interacting under
the influence of these charges.  The Hamiltonian for the system is given in atomic units by

                              NX          NX   MX     ZI          NX      1         MX    ZIZJ
                  H =−12          ∆ri−             |ri− RI| +        |ri−rj| +          |RI− RJ|,                    (1)
                             i=1          i=1 I=1                i<j               I<J



                                                           3
whereri∈ R3 represents the position of electron i and ∆ri  represents the corresponding Laplacian
operator.  Because electrons are fermions, the wavefunction must be antisymmetric with respect to
particle exchange.  Within the space of antisymmetric wavefunctions, the ground-state energy E0
and wavefunction|ψ0⟩ correspond to the smallest eigenvalue of H and its corresponding eigenfunc-
tion.
    We make several simplifications to the space of wavefunctions before searching for the ground-
state.  First, since the Hamiltonian is Hermitian, its ground-state wavefunction can be chosen to be
purely real.  We thus limit our search to real normalizable many-body wavefunctions of the form
ψ : R3N→ R, usually written as ψ(R) = ψ(r1,...,rN) with R∈ R3N.  Next, we fix the numbers
N↑,N↓ of up- and down-spin electrons a priori for each calculation. Given this assumption, together
with  the  antisymmetry  of  the  wavefunction  and  the  spin-independence  of  the  Hamiltonian,  it  is
possible to assume without loss of generality that the first N↑ electrons are always spin-up and the
last N↓ electrons are always spin-down [1].
    The ground-state wavefunction can be found by minimizing the expectation value of the energy:

                                              |ψ0⟩ = argmin⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩

                                                           ψ       ⟨ψ|ψ⟩ .                                                      (2)

Given a variational ansatz|ψθ⟩, we can then define a loss function

                                                  L(θ) =⟨ψθ|H|ψθ⟩⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩                                                             (3)

and represent the ground-state approximately via

                                 θ∗ = argmin
                                            θ  L(θ),|ψ0⟩≈|ψθ∗⟩, E0≈L(θ∗).                                     (4)
    In some electronic structure methods, such as the Hartree-Fock method and configuration inter-
action methods, the ansatz is chosen to enable the direct calculation ofL(θ) based on precomputed
one- and two-electron integrals.  In variational Monte Carlo, the ansatz is chosen in a more flexible
way, such as a Slater-Jastrow ansatz, a Slater-Jastrow-backflow ansatz, or a neural network wave-
function.  For such ansatzes it is not possible to directly evaluate L(θ), so it is necessary to instead
approximate it via Monte Carlo integration.  To this end, L(θ) can be reformulated stochastically
as
                                                L(θ) = ER∼p [EL(θ)],                                                        (5)
where p(R) =ψθ(R)2/⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩ and EL(R) =Hψθ(R)/ψθ(R) (see i.e.  [1], Section III.C). This last
term, EL(R), is known as the local energy  of the wavefunction|ψθ⟩ at the position R.
    To optimize a variational wavefunction using this formula, it is usually necessary to calculate
the gradient∇θL(θ).  A convenient formula for this gradient can be derived taking advantage of
the fact that H is Hermitian (see i.e.  [32], Appendix E):

                            g =∇θL(θ) = 2ER∼p [∇θ log|ψθ(R)| (EL(R)−L(θ))].                              (6)

In practice, bothL(θ) andg are estimated stochastically using Markov-Chain Monte Carlo sampling
to generate samples from p(R).  The parameters can then be updated by a variety of optimization
schemes, several of which we discuss in the following sections.



                                                             4
2.2.  Stochastic Reconfiguration
    One popular approach for optimizing variational wavefunctions is known as stochastic recon-
figuration (SR) [13, 14, 15] .  In recent years,  SR has been widely adopted for optimizing neural
quantum states in second quantization [33, 34].  It also serves as the starting point for the MinSR
method to be introduced later.
    SR is based on the idea of imaginary time evolution, which states that the ground-state|ψ0⟩
can be found via the formula
                                                  |ψ0⟩ =  limτ→∞e−τH|ψ⟩                                                         (7)

for any wavefunction|ψ⟩ such that⟨ψ0|ψ⟩̸= 0.  In SR, we optimize a variational ansatz|ψθ⟩ by
finding parameter updates that approximate small imaginary time steps.  In particular, we choose
a step-size δτ  and use this to define the desired updated wavefunction|ψ′⟩ = e−δτH|ψθ⟩.  Due to
the constraints of the ansatz, we cannot update our wavefunction to|ψ′⟩ directly.  Instead we seek
a parameter update dθ such that|ψθ+dθ⟩ is close to|ψ′⟩.  To measure the closeness, we rely on the
Fubini-Study distance defined by

                                            D(|ψ⟩,|ϕ⟩) = arccos |⟨ψ|ϕ⟩|∥ψ∥∥ϕ∥.                                                  (8)

In  practice,  we  make  a  first  order  approximation  to  both|ψ′⟩  and|ψθ+dθ⟩  and  then  minimize  a
second-order approximation to D2(|ψ′⟩,|ψθ+dθ⟩).  See [35] for a more thorough discussion of the
geometric underpinnings of stochastic reconfiguration.
    To  present  the  formula  for  the  update,  we  first  define  the  functions   ¯O(R)  and  ¯ϵ(R).   The
first quantity,  ¯O(R), is the transposed gradient of the logarithm of the normalized wavefunction,
evaluated  at  the  point R.   The  second  quantity,  ¯ϵ(R),  is  the  first-order  change  in  the  logarithm
of the normalized wavefunction induced by the imaginary time-step δτ, evaluated at the point R.
These quantities are given by
                               ¯O(R) = (∇θ log|ψθ(R)|− ER∼p [∇θ log|ψθ(R)|])T,                                 (9)

                                       ¯ϵ(R) =−δτ (EL(R)− ER∼p [EL(R)]).                                         (10)
It can be shown that, to second order, the square of the Fubini-study distance is given by
                                                                   h ¯O(R)dθ− ¯ϵ(R)2i
                                 D2(|ψ′⟩,|ψθ+dθ⟩) = ER∼p                                    .                                  (11)

This leads us to define the SR parameter update by
                                                             h ¯O(R)dθ′− ¯ϵ(R)2i
                                     dθ = argmin                                        .                                        (12)
                                               dθ′    ER∼p
A detailed derivation of this formulation of stochastic reconfiguration can be found in [26].
    In practice, (11) must always be approximated using a finite collection ofNs samplesR1,...,RNs.
To estimate  ¯O(R) and ¯ϵ(R) at the sampled points, we must empirically estimate the expectation
values that appear in their definitions.  We first define
                                          ∇θ log|ψθ(R1)|                           EL(R1)    
                          O =    1√               ...        , ϵ =− δτ√             ...   .                          (13)
                                   Ns     ∇θ log|ψθ(RNS)|                     Ns     EL(RNs)


                                                              5
Next, let 1 be the column vector of length NS  whose entries are all equal to 1 and let P  =   1Ns 11T
represent the orthogonal projector onto the span of 1.  When acting on the left,  the operator P
replaces  each  row  of  the  matrix  or  vector  on  its  right  with  the  average  of  all  of  its  rows.   Our
empirical estimates of  ¯O(R) and ¯ϵ(R) can thus be collected as

                                              ¯O = (I−P )O,  ¯ϵ = (I−P )ϵ.                                                (14)

The estimate of the Fubini-Study distance of the update dθ can then be written as

                                           D2(|ψ′⟩,|ψθ+dθ⟩)≈ ¯Odθ− ¯ϵ2,                                             (15)

and the update takes the form                                     ¯Odθ′− ¯ϵ2.                                                  (16)
                                               dθ = argmin
                                                         dθ′
    In traditional SR, many more samples are taken than parameters in the ansatz, meaning that
the least-squares problem is overdetermined and should have a unique solution.  To protect against
the case when  ¯O is ill-conditioned or singular, a Tikhonov regularization is generally added to yield
the regularized problem                                      ¯Odθ′− ¯ϵ2 +∥dθ′∥2.                                          (17)
                                        dθ = argmin      1
                                                  dθ′    λ
In the case of real parameters and a real wavefunction, the solution to (17) is given by

                                                dθ = ( ¯OT ¯O +λI)−1 ¯OT ¯ϵ.                                                    (18)

This is more traditionally written as

                                                 dθ =−δτ2 (S +λI)−1g,                                                     (19)

whereS =  ¯OT ¯O,g =∇θL(θ) =−2 ¯OT ¯ϵ/δτ, and the imaginary time step has been halved to cancel
the factor of two in the gradient.

2.3.  Minimum-Step Stochastic Reconfiguration
    For  a  problem  with Np  variational  parameters,  the  traditional  SR  update  scales  as O(N3p )
due  to  the  need  to  invert  the Np×Np  matrix S.   The  insight  of  MinSR  is  that  the  parameter
update can be calculated much more efficiently when Ns≪Np.  In fact the linear system is highly
underdetermined in this setting.  The MinSR method addresses this issue by choosing the solution
with  minimal  norm.   For  regularization,  MinSR  utilizes  a  pseudoinverse  with  a  cutoff  for  small
eigenvalues.   Subsequently,  Rende  et  al  [27]  suggested  using  a  Tikhonov  regularization  instead.
This approach amounts to solving the same regularized equation as in traditional SR, namely (17).
In  the  underdetermined  setting,  the  application  of  the  Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury  formula  to
(18) yields the solution
                                                dθ =  ¯OT ( ¯O ¯OT +λI)−1¯ϵ.                                                    (20)
This is the version of MinSR that we use as the basis for SPRING. The key point is that the update
can now be calculated efficiently since  ¯O ¯OT  is only Ns×Ns rather than Np×Np.
    It is worth noting that methods very similar to MinSR were introduced independently in the
machine learning community as early as 2019.  For example, Zhang, Martens, and Grosse decribed a


                                                                6
pseudoinverse-based approach to natural gradient descent for the overparameterized case when the
number of parameters is greater than the total number of data-points available [36] .  Subsequently,
Ren and Goldfarb proposed an efficient subsampled natural gradient method [25] for the case when
the minibatch size is smaller than the number of parameters.  In fact, the Tikhonov-regularized form
of MinSR can be viewed as a streamlined implementation of the method of Ren and Goldfarb which
applies whenever the gradient of the loss function is a linear combination of the model gradients at
the sampled points.  We elaborate on this connection in Appendix  A.

2.4.  Kaczmarz method for solving linear systems
    MinSR enables the efficient solution of an underdetermined subsample from the SR equation,
but the solution of such an equation is not necessarily a good approximation to the solution of the
original SR equation.  Our goal is to develop an algorithm that can converge to the solution of the
original SR equation using only a series of underdetermined subsamples.  This is the motivation
behind the Kaczmarz algorithm, and in particular its blocked variants.
    To understand the Kaczmarz algorithm, consider an overdetermined system of linear equations
Ax =b, where A is m×n and                                             
                                                      aT1...          b1...
                                              A =       , b =      .                                                     (21)

                                                      aTm            bm
Assume that A has full column rank and that the system is consistent, meaning that there exists
a unique x∗ such that Ax∗ =b.  The earliest form of the Kaczmarz algorithm, which dates back to
the first half of the twentieth century [37], solves this problem iteratively.  A starting guess x0  is
required for initialization and is then honed by iterations of the form
                                        xk =xk−1 +  ai∥ai∥2 (bi−aTi xk−1),                                             (22)

where i is chosen to cycle through all the rows of A one at a time.  The interpretation is that xk is
attained by projecting xk−1 onto the solution space of the sampled equation aTi x =bi.
    The seminal work of Strohmer and Vershynin [28] proposed a randomized variant of the algo-
rithm which samples rowi with a probability proportional to∥ai∥2.  With this randomized sampling
strategy, they showed that the algorithm converges ash

                                E   ∥xk−x∗∥2i       ≤ 1−κD(A)−2k∥x0−x∗∥2,                                   (23)

where κD(A) =∥A∥F∥A+∥2 is the Demmel condition number of A and A+ is the Moore-Penrose
pseudoinverse of A.
    Since single row updates are very inefficient on modern hardware, blocked versions of the ran-
domized Kaczmarz algorithm were subsequently proposed and analyzed, i.e.  [29].  Such randomized
block Kaczmarz algorithms take the form
                                         xk =xk−1 +A+σ (bσ−Aσxk−1),                                              (24)
where σ  represents  a  randomly  selected  subset  of  the  rows  of A  and b  and A+σ  represents  the
pseudoinverse of Aσ.  The interpretation is similar to before: xk  represents the projection of xk−1
onto the solution space of the sampled equationAσx =bσ.  For consistent equations the randomized
block Kaczmarz algorithm converges linearly to the true solutionx∗, though the convergence rate is
more complicated than in the single row case and has a more nuanced dependence on the sampling
procedure.


                                                            7
3.  Methods

    We now present our main contribution, the Subsampled Projected-Increment Natural Gradient
Descent  (SPRING)  algorithm  for  optimizing  neural  network  wavefunctions.   To  start,  recall  the
formula for the SR parameter update:
                                                              h ¯O(R)dθ′− ¯ϵ(R)2i
                                      dθ = argmin                                        .                                        (25)
                                                dθ′    ER∼p
Since R  is  drawn  from  a  continuous  and  high-dimensional  space  this  equation  can  be  seen  as  a
highly overdetermined linear least-squares problem, with each configuration R corresponding to a
single row.  Now, let  ¯Ok  and ¯ϵk  denote the subsamples from  ¯O(R) and ¯ϵ(R) that are available at
VMC training iteration k.  Our approach hinges on the assumption that the imaginary time-step
is small, meaning the parameter vector θ changes only slightly at each iteration.  Thus, although
the  sampled  subproblems  ( ¯Ok−1, ¯ϵk−1),  ( ¯Ok, ¯ϵk)  can  be  completely  different,  the  underlying  SR
equations are nearly identical.  This inspires us to proceed as follows:
   1.Make  the  approximation  that  the  recent  iterates  (    ¯Ok, ¯ϵk), ( ¯Ok−1, ¯ϵk−1),...  are  all  random
       block samples from the current SR equation
                                                              h ¯O(R)dθ′− ¯ϵ(R)2i
                                             argmin                                      .                                       (26)
                                                dθ′    ER∼p
   2.Apply  the  randomized  block  Kazcmarz  method  to  these  iterates  to  yield  an  approximate
       solution ϕk to the current SR equation.
   3.Apply  some  scaling  and  clipping  procedures,  to  be  described  later,  to  ϕk  to  calculate  the
       parameter update dθk.
In this way SPRING takes advantage of the entire optimization history to inform each parameter
update, distinguishing it from MinSR which leverages only a single minibatch of data at a time.
    Following  the  structure  of  a  single  step  of  the  randomized  block  Kaczmarz  method  [29],  we
calculateϕk by projectingϕk−1 onto the solution space of the underdetermined equation  ¯Okϕ = ¯ϵk.
Recall that the basic form for the Kaczmarz projection is

                                           ϕk =ϕk−1 +  ¯O+k (¯ϵk−  ¯Okϕk−1).                                              (27)

Equivalently we can say that ϕk satisfies

                                     ϕk = arg min
                                                 ϕ  ∥ϕ−ϕk−1∥2  s.t.  ¯Okϕ = ¯ϵk.                                       (28)
Thus, at a conceptual level, our algorithm differs from MinSR only in how we break the indetermi-
nacy of the sampled subproblem:  MinSR chooses the solution of minimal norm, whereas SPRING
chooses the solution that is nearest to the previous approximate solution.
    In  practice   ¯Ok  can  be  singular  or  very  ill-conditioned,  so  it  is  beneficial  add  some  form  of
regularization to this projection.  We choose to regularize the projection by incorporating the linear
equations  using  a  penalty  term  rather  than  a  hard  constraint.   To  make  this  modification,  we
introduce a regularization parameter λ and use the formula
                                   ϕk = argmin       1  ¯Okϕ− ¯ϵk2 +∥ϕ−ϕk−1∥2.                                    (29)

                                              ϕ      λ


                                                               8
    Even with this regularization, we find that directly using (29) can result in unstable optimization
trajectories (see Figure 10b).  We do not yet have an explanation for this phenomenon.  To stabilize
the method, we decay the previous gradient by a small amount before projecting it.  Formally, this
stabilization comes in the form of a new regularization parameterµ and a modified update formula
                                  ϕk = argmin      1   ¯Okϕ− ¯ϵk2 +∥ϕ−µϕk−1∥2.                                   (30)

                                             ϕ     λ

    An explicit formula forϕk can now be derived.  We first defineπk =ϕk−µϕk−1,π =ϕ−µϕk−1,
and  ¯ζk = ¯ϵk−µ ¯Okϕk−1 and note that (30) can be recast as
                                       πk = argmin       1  ¯Okπ− ¯ζk2 +∥π∥2.                                          (31)

                                                  π      λ

This formula now has the same form as MinSR with Tikhonov regularization, so we know that the
solution is given by
                                             πk =  ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI)−1 ¯ζk.                                                  (32)
Finally, we can translate back to ϕk yielding

                                        ϕk =  ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI)−1 ¯ζk +µϕk−1.                                           (33)

To understand this formula, it is helpful to explicitly write out the three terms:

                    ϕk =  ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI)−1¯ϵk +µϕk−1−µ ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI)−1 ¯Okϕk−1.                  (34)

The  first  term  alone  corresponds  to  MinSR,  while  the  first  two  terms  together  correspond  to  a
scaled version of MinSR with momentum (to be presented in Section 3.4).  It is the addition of the
third term that concretely distinguishes SPRING from these other methods.
    Equation  (33)  is  almost  the  formula  that  we  use  in  practice.   The  only  missing  piece  is  an
extra stabilization procedure that we introduce in Section 3.2, which is not essential but should be
included for best performance.  Finally, to calculate dθk, we also include a learning rate schedule
ηk and a norm constraint C which ensures that the parameters are not changed too much at each
iteration (see Section 3.1).  To ensure that the Kaczmarz algorithm is implemented consistently,
regardless of the learning rate schedule, we always calculate ¯ϵk  using δτ  = 1 and then apply the
learning  rate ηk  only  when  we  calculate dθk.   For  convenience  we  present  the  full  procedure  for
SPRING including these extra details in Algorithm 1.
    It is worth noting that due to several technical details, we cannot directly transfer the conver-
gence  results  for  the  classical  Kaczmarz  method  to  the  VMC  setting.   First  of  all,  the  inclusion
of the parameter µ in SPRING distinguishes it substantially from the Kaczmarz method.  We can
understand this distinction as arising from the fact that in SPRING, the underlying least-squares
system changes a small amount after each iteration.  Thus, it makes sense to progressively forget
the information  from previous iterations,  which is what  we  accomplish by  setting µ <  1.  Addi-
tionally, the least-squares problem arising in VMC need not be consistent, and in the inconsistent
setting the Kaczmarz method only converges to within a ball of the true solution, with the radius
of the ball depending on how inconsistent the system is [38].  For these reasons, we cannot derive
a rigorous convergence guarantee for SPRING with regard to either dθ or θ.  Still, the connection
to  the  Kaczmarz  method  serves  to  motivate  the  algorithm  and  explain  its  superior  performance
relative to MinSR.


                                                              9
Algorithm 1 SPRING
Require:  Hamiltonian H, ansatz ψθ,
Require:  Initialization θ0, iteration count K, batch size Ns, learning rate schedule ηk
Require:  Tikhonov damping λ, decay factor µ, norm constraint C
 1: θ←θ0
 2: ϕ← 0
 3:  for k in 1:K do
 4:       Sample R1,...,RNs  from p(R) =ψθ(R)2/⟨ψθ|ψθ⟩               ▷ i.e.  using MCMC
 5:       Calculate  ¯O, ¯ϵ using δτ = 1                                ▷ via (13), (14)
 6:        ¯ζ← ¯ϵ−µ ¯Oϕ
 7:   ϕ←  ¯OT ( ¯O ¯OT +λI +   1Ns 11T )−1 ¯ζ +µϕ           ▷ following (39) and using Cholesky
 8:   dθ←ϕ· min(ηk,√C/∥ϕ∥)                                ▷ See Section 3.1
 9:   θ←θ +dθ
10:  end for
11:  return θ


3.1.  Norm Constraint
    As an additional stabilization procedure,  we include a constraint on the norm of the MinSR,
MinSR+M, and SPRING updates inspired by the norm constraint used by KFAC. We have found
that including this norm constraint helps to stabilize the optimization procedure and enable larger
learning rates to be applied,  and it also improves the ability to transfer learning rates from one
system to another.  For reference we briefly describe how the norm constraint used by KFAC works
before introducing the form of the norm constraint that we use for MinSR and SPRING.
    The norm constraint in KFAC is “natural” in the sense that it applies to the norm induced by
the Fisher information matrix as opposed to the Euclidean norm.  To define this scheme let g  be
the estimated energy gradient, η  be the learning rate, S  be KFAC’s approximation to the Fisher
information matrix, and ϕ = S−1g  be the unscaled and unconstrained KFAC parameter update.
The final update will be dθ =cϕ for some scalar c.  The norm constraint relies upon the fact that
∥dθ∥2S =c2ϕTSϕ =c2ϕTg and as a result it enforces the constraint

                                                     c2ϕTg≤C.                                                              (35)

Concretely this is achieved by choosing

                                           dθ =ϕ· min(η,√C/pϕTg).                                                 (36)

    In SPRING the update dθ and the gradient g  are not related by a positive definite matrix S;
hence the above scheme is not justified.  Instead we implement a simple Euclidean norm constraint
given by
                                                     ∥dθ∥2≤C.                                                               (37)
Just  like  in  KFAC,  if  this  constraint  is  violated  before  the  norm  constraint  is  applied,  we  scale
the update down to ensure that it is satisfied.  Concretely, we calculate the update dθk  from the
Kaczmarz iterate ϕk and the learning rate ηk using the formula

                                         dθk =ϕk· min(ηk,√C/∥ϕk∥).


                                                          10
3.2.  Numerically Stable Inversion
    In exact arithmetic,T  =  ¯O ¯OT is positive semidefinite,T +λI is positive definite, and (T +λI)−1 ¯ζ
can be computed efficiently using the Cholesky decomposition.  However, in single precision we have
found that the T  matrix can be become indefinite.  As a result, the Cholesky decomposition can
fail if the regularization is chosen to be too small, and we have even observed this to occur when
using our default value of λ = 0.001.
    We now note thatT is always singular due to the construction of  ¯O.  Recall that 1 represents the
column vector whose entries are all equal to 1 and P  =   1Ns 11T  represents the orthogonal projector
onto the span of 1.  Since  ¯O = (I−P )O, we have that

                              T1 =  ¯O ¯OT1 =  ¯OOT (I−P ) 1 =  ¯OOT (1− 1) = 0.                                (38)

This means that any numerical perturbation to T  can make it indefinite.  If the numerical pertur-
bation is large enough, the resulting T  matrix can have an eigenvalue smaller than−λ, in which
case the Cholesky factorization fails.  This can happen even when all of the other eigenvalues of T
are well-separated from 0.
    We  alleviate  this  issue  by  replacing  the  matrix T  +λI  with  the  further  regularized  matrix
T +λI +ωP  for some positive real ω.  We thus calculate the Kaczmarz iterate for iteration k as

                                      ϕk =  ¯OTk (Tk +λI +ωP )−1 ¯ζk +µϕk−1.                                         (39)

This does not affect the value of ϕk in exact arithmetic.  To see this, note that 1 is an eigenvector
of (Tk +λI) with eigenvalue λ, and is thus also an eigenvector of (Tk +λI +ωP ) with eigenvalue
ω +λ.  As a result, we have
                                                                               1
                             (Tk +λI +ωP )−1 = (Tk +λI)−1 +                  ω +λ− 1λ        P.                              (40)

Acting on the left with  ¯OTk  then annihilates the extra term:
                                                                                  1
                       ¯OTK(Tk +λI +ωP )−1 =  ¯OTk (Tk +λI)−1 +                ω +λ− 1λ         ¯OTkP

                                                   =  ¯OTk (Tk +λI)−1.

    Thus, using (39) reduces the likelihood that numerical errors cause the Cholesky solver to fail
without otherwise affecting the computation.  In our experiments we have used the value ω = 1 in
all cases.  However, it is theoretically possible for the eigenvalues of T  to all be smaller than 1, in
which case settingω = 1 would increase the condition number of the regularized T  matrix.  In such
a case ω could instead be chosen for example to be the mean of the eigenvalues of the original T
matrix.

3.3.  MinSR implementation details
    We now briefly discuss the version of MinSR that we use for our numerical experiments, which
is  very  similar  but  not  identical  to  the  basic  version  presented  in  Section  2.3.   Functionally,  the
only differences are the inclusion of a norm constraint and the extra regularization of the matrix
¯Ok ¯OTk  as described in Section 3.2.  Additionally, for consistency with SPRING we set δτ = 1 when



                                                             11
calculating ¯ϵk  and we instead control the step size with a learning rate parameter ηk.  With these
modifications the MinSR algorithm is described by the following formulas:

                                        ϕk =  ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI +P )−1¯ϵk,                                              (41)

                                         dθk =ϕk· min(ηk,√C/∥ϕk∥).                                               (42)

3.4.  MinSR with Momentum
    We motivate SPRING primarily via its relation to the Kaczmarz method.  An alternative view-
point is to see SPRING as a modification of a momentum method with an added projection step
to remove the component of the momentum that conflicts with the current subproblem  ¯Okdθ = ¯ϵ.
While we do not endorse this perspective, it is natural to wonder how SPRING would compare to
MinSR with na¨ıve momentum, which we refer to as MinSR+M.
    Concretely, MinSR+M iteratively updates a momentum directionϕk by taking a convex combi-
nation of the previous valueϕk−1 and the current MinSR solution.  Just like in SPRING, we assume
an imaginary time step of δτ  = 1 when we calculate ¯ϵk  and instead control the step size using a
learning rate parameter ηk and a norm constraint.  The method is thus described by the formulas:

                               ϕk = (1−µ) ¯OTk ( ¯Ok ¯OTk  +λI +P )−1¯ϵk +µϕk−1,                                 (43)

                                         dθk =ϕk· min(ηk,√C/∥ϕk∥).                                               (44)
    As  in  SPRING,  the µ  parameter  acts  as  a  decay  factor  on  the  previous  parameter  update.
However, MinSR+M differs significantly from SPRING in that no regularized projector is applied
to the previous update.  It also differs in that the MinSR solution is scaled by a factor of (1−µ)
to achieve a convex combination, which means µ must be chosen to be strictly less than one.  See
Section 4.3 and Figure 10a for further discussion of the choice of µ for MinSR+M. We demonstrate
in our numerical experiments that SPRING outperforms MinSR+M substantially.  This supports
the viewpoint that SPRING is not simply a momentum method, but is rather a way of improving
the quality of the parameter updates as approximate solutions to the SR equation.


4.  Results

    We now turn to our numerical results.  Our main finding is that SPRING outperforms KFAC,
MinSR, and MinSR+M for several small atoms and molecules.  We present results for the carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen atoms in Section 4.1 and for the N2  and CO molecules in Section 4.2.  We
summarize the final energies attained in our main experiments in Table 1.  We use VMCNet [30] to
run all our experiments, which is a neural network VMC framework based on JAX [39].  For all of
our experiments, we use a standard FermiNet architecture with 16 dense determinants; see Table
B.2 for details.
    For our training phase we use one hundred thousand optimization iterations with one thousand
MCMC samples per iteration.  For our MCMC proposals we use Gaussian all-electrons moves with a
step-size that is tuned dynamically to maintain an acceptance ratio of approximately 50%.  We take
ten MCMC steps between optimization iterations to reduce correlations between the samples, and
we use mean–centered local energy clipping to improve the stability of the optimization.  We use a
decaying learning rate with a decay rate of r = 1e− 4 and learning rate schedule ηk =  η1+rk.  For
MinSR, MINSR+M, and SPRING, we assume δτ = 1 and apply the learning rate ηk as described


                                                           12
           System           KFAC         MinSR       MinSR+M         SPRING       Benchmark      Benchmark source
             C             -37.8445     -37.8445       -37.8448      -37.8449       -37.8450        [40], Table XI
             N             -54.5877     -54.5885       -54.5889      -54.5890       -54.5892        [40], Table XI
             O             -75.0643     -75.0652       -75.0659      -75.0668       -75.0673        [40], Table XI
      N2, equilibrium     -109.5301     -109.5268     -108.5294     -109.5322      -109.5423        [41], Table II
       N2, 4.0 Bohr       -109.1862     -109.1794     -109.1829     -109.1906      -109.2021      [42], MLR4(6, 8)
             CO           -113.3140     -113.3092     -113.3117     -113.3169      -113.3255         [3], Table II

Table 1:  Summary of final energies attained with tuned learning rates for all systems studied.  Energies are reported
in Hartrees, to four decimal places.


in Section 3.  For more details on our VMC settings, see Table B.3.  To obtain final energies we run
a separate inference phase with the parameters from the last iteration of each optimization run; see
Table B.4 for details.
    To compare the methods fairly, we do not start them from fully random initializations.  Rather,
for each system in question, we first run a short preliminary optimization and save the result to a
checkpoint.  The rest of our experiments then load the starting parameters from the end of the pre-
liminary optimization phase, switch out the optimizer and hyperparameters to the desired settings,
and run one hundred thousand further optimization iterations.  This procedure removes the chaotic
early optimization stage as a factor from the comparison between the different methods, ensuring
that no method is unfairly advantaged by randomly having a favorable start.  Our preliminary op-
timization is different from the Hartree-Fock pretraining procedure (see [3, 6] for example) because
we optimize the variational energy from the beginning.  However, our results should translate well
to a setting with pretraining as a result of this preliminary optimization.  See Table B.5 for more
details on the preliminary optimization phase.
    For all of our optimizers we use a Tikhonov regularization parameter of λ = 0.001 and a norm
constraint ofC = 0.001 unless indicated otherwise.  For MinSR+M we use a momentum parameter
of µ  =  0.9,  and  for  SPRING  we  use  the  regularization  parameter µ  =  0.99.   In  Section  4.3  we
present several hyperparameter studies which demonstrate that these values provide a fair basis for
comparing the methods.  We also investigate the effect of the preliminary optimization phase and
demonstrate that SPRING outperforms KFAC significantly without preliminary optimization.
    In all of our numerical results we report energy errors relative to the benchmark energies listed
in Table 1.  For the energy and variance trajectories, we smooth out the curves by reporting averages
over a sliding window of ten thousand iterations.  We note that we are using a somewhat smaller
network, fewer MCMC samples, and fewer optimization iterations than were used in most state-of-
the-art calculations with KFAC; hence it should not be surprising that some of our results do not
reach the same level of accuracy as those presented in the literature for comparable systems.  Our
results can be viewed as as proof-of-principle for the value of SPRING on small calculations, which
will need to be extended to larger calculations by future works.

4.1.  Small atoms
    We first present results for KFAC, MinSR, MinSR+M, and SPRING on the carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen atoms.  We find that it is critical to turn the learning rate of each method in order
to achieve the best performance and obtain a fair comparison.  Thus, for each method, we test a
number of learning rates on the carbon atom, with results presented in Figure 1.  Our experiments
lead us to choose a learning rate of η = 0.02 for KFAC,η = 0.1 for MinSR,η = 0.2 for MinSR+M,
and η = 0.02 for SPRING.


                                                            13
                       (a) KFAC                                                        (b) MinSR















                     (c) MinSR+M                                                      (d) SPRING

                 Figure 1:  Learning rate sweeps on the carbon atom with four different optimizers.


    After tuning the learning rates on the carbon atom, we use the selected learning rates to compare
the methods on carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.  The results with optimized learning rates are shown
in Figure 2.  On the carbon atom,  we find that SPRING reaches chemical accuracy significantly
faster than the other methods.  Relative to KFAC and MinSR, its final energy error is about a factor
of four lower,  and its final local energy variance that is about an order of magnitude lower.  On
nitrogen and oxygen, SPRING continues to outperform the other methods. In the case of the oxygen
atom, SPRING reaches chemical accuracy after forty thousand iterations, whereas MinSR+M takes
eighty thousand iterations and the other methods never reach chemical accuracy.

4.2.  Molecules
    We next test KFAC, MinSR, MinSR+M, and SPRING on two somewhat larger systems:  the N2
and CO molecules.  We begin by tuning the learning rates for all four methods on the N2 molecule
at an equilibrium bond distance of 2.016 Bohr.  We present the results of the learning rate sweeps in
Figure 3.  Based on these results, we pick learning rates of η = 0.05 for KFAC,η = 0.02 for MinSR,
η = 0.02 for MinSR+M, and η = 0.002 for SPRING. These learning rates are not always chosen
strictly for the best final energy since the final energy can vary due to statistical fluctuations in
the parameters and statistical errors in the energy estimation.  We instead look at the optimization
trajectories and the final energies and pick the learning rate that appears to be optimal based on
the combination of the two.  It is worth noting that the optimal learning rates for MinSR+M and
SPRING  change  by  a  factor  of  10  between  the  carbon  atom  and  the  N2  molecule,  whereas  the
optimal learning rate for MinSR changes by only a factor of 5, and the optimal learning rate for
KFAC changes by only a factor of 2.  The optimal learning rate may thus be more system-dependent
for MinSR+M and SPRING compared to the other methods.
    Using these optimized learning rates, we then compare the four methods on the N2  molecule
both at equilibrium and at a stretched bond distance of 4.0 Bohr, and on the CO molecule at an


                                                           14
                                                    (a) Carbon atom.





















                                                   (b) Nitrogen atom.





















                                                    (c) Oxygen atom

Figure 2:  Comparison of methods on three small atoms, with learning rates tuned on the carbon atom.





                                                            15
                        (a) KFAC                                                         (b) MinSR















                      (c) MinSR+M                                                       (d) SPRING

Figure 3:  Learning rate sweeps on the nitrogen molecule at equilibrium bond distance with four different optimizers.


equilibrium bond distance of 2.173 Bohr.  The results of these comparisons are presented in Figure
4  and  Figure  5.   For  these  systems  none  of  the  optimizers  are  able  to  reach  chemical  accuracy,
which is expected due to the relatively small network, few MCMC samples, and few optimization
iterations  that  we  are  using.   Nonetheless,  SPRING  still  displays  a  marked  advantage  over  the
other  methods,  converging  much  faster  and  to  a  lower  energy  and  energy  variance  in  all  three
cases.  The MinSR+M optimizer only improves upon MinSR marginally for these systems, and it
is outperformed by KFAC. This provides evidence that the SPRING algorithm is distinctly better
than simply adding momentum on top of MinSR.

4.3.  Hyperparameter studies
    In this section, we provide several experiments that demonstrate that our main results are robust
to the choices ofC andµ.  We also provide evidence that the results are not significantly skewed by
the preliminary optimization phase.  For simplicity we focus on the carbon atom for the purposes
of this section.
    We first show in Figure 6 how the results of the learning rate experiments differ if we do not apply
a norm constraint to any of the methods.  In all four cases, the performance is much more sensitive
to the learning rate when the constraint is turned off, and we are prevented from displaying results
with larger learning rates because they produce completely unstable optimization trajectories.  The
combination of these factors means that without the norm constraints, it is much more difficult to
find an effective learning rate, and our ability to transfer the learning rate from system to system is
hindered. Nonetheless, even with the norm constraint off, the tuned version of SPRING significantly
outperforms the tuned versions of the other methods, as shown in Figure 7.  In Figure 8, we show
that neither increasing nor decreasing the norm constraint used for KFAC enables it to compete
with  the  performance  of  SPRING  on  the  carbon  atom.   This  provides  further  evidence  that  the
advantage of SPRING is not related to the choice or the form of the norm constraint.


                                                             16
                                     (a) Equilibrium configuration, bond distance 2.016 Bohr.





















                                        (b) Stretched configuration, bond distance 4.0 Bohr.

Figure 4:  Comparison of methods on N2 molecule at two bond distances, with learning rates tuned at equilibrium.























                  Figure 5:  Comparison of methods on CO molecule, with learning rates tuned on N2.




                                                                     17
                         (a) KFAC                                                          (b) MinSR















                      (c) MinSR+M                                                         (d) SPRING

    Figure 6:  Learning rate sweeps on the carbon atom without norm constraints with four different optimizers.


    To better understand the impact of the norm constraint on SPRING, we return to the learning
rate  sweep  for  SPRING  on  the  carbon  atom  and  provide  some  additional  data  from  these  five
optimization runs.  In particular, we plot the scale factor qk = max(1,∥ηkϕk∥/√C).  For example,
if qk  =  5  then  this  means  that  at  iteration k  the  norm  constraint  resulted  in  a  scaling  down  of
the  parameter  update  by  a  factor  of  5,  and  if qk  =  1  then  the  norm  constraint  at  iteration k
had no effect.  We see in Figure 9 that qk  tends to grow over the course of the first one hundred
optimization iterations and then decay to 1 as the optimization progresses.  We can understand this
in the following way: qk  first rises as more optimization history is incorporated into SPRING; it
then decays due to both the learning rate decay and the decay of the energy gradient.  As should
be expected, with a larger learning rate, qk reaches a larger peak and takes longer to decay to 1.
    Next, we test the MinSR+M scheme with several different values of the momentum parameter




















       Figure 7:  Comparison of methods on carbon atom, with tuned learning rates and no norm constraint.


                                                              18
Figure 8:  Testing KFAC on the carbon atom with different values of the norm constraint C.  No value performs
better than the default value of C = 0.001 and all settings are outperformed by SPRING with C = 0.001.  All runs
use the optimized learning rate of η = 0.02.






























Figure 9:  Effect of the norm constraint on the SPRING parameter update during the learning rate sweep on the
carbon atom.  The quantityqk = max(1, ∥ηkϕk∥/√C) represents the extent to which the parameter update is scaled
down as a result of the norm constraint.






                                                                   19
                            (a)                                                               (b)

Figure  10:  Hyperparameter  studies  for  the  parameter µ  for  both  MinSR+M  and  SPRING.  (a)  MinSR+M  with
several values of the momentum parameter µ, on the carbon atom.  The learning rate is held fixed at the previously
tuned value of η = 0.2.  (b) SPRING on the carbon atom with several values of the regularization parameter µ.  All
values converge well except for the unregularized caseµ = 1.0, shown in black, for which the optimization is unstable
and encounters NaNs after approximately twenty thousand epochs.  The learning rate is held fixed at the previously
tuned value of η = 0.02


µ, using the previously optimized learning rate of η = 0.2.  For values larger than µ = 0.95 we find
that the optimization is unstable and we do not report numerical results.  We find that choosing µ
anywhere between 0.8 and 0.95 produces approximately optimal results, which justifies our use of
µ = 0.9 for our main experiments.  Results are shown in Figure 10a.  Similarly, we test SPRING
with several values of its regularization parameter µ, again using the previously optimized learning
rate ofη = 0.02.  Results are shown in Figure 10b.  We find that choosing µ anywhere between 0.98
and 0.999 produces approximately optimal results,  which justifies our choice of µ = 0.99 for our
main experiments.  Interestingly, ifµ = 1.0 then the method becomes unstable.  We do not yet have
an explanation for the source of this instability.
    Finally, we consider the effects of the preliminary optimization phase.  Since we have used KFAC
for the preliminary optimization in all cases, it is unclear thus far whether SPRING can perform well
when run from a random initialization.  To ameliorate this concern, we compare the performance of
SPRING against KFAC without any preliminary optimization, with results in Figure 11.  We find
that KFAC outperforms SPRING in the very early stages of the optimization.  However, SPRING
overtakes KFAC after about seven thousand training iterations and reaches chemical accuracy in
fewer than half as many iterations as KFAC. We conclude that SPRING is also effective starting
from a random initialization.

4.4.  Computational Cost
    The  computational  cost  of  SPRING  is  essentially  identical  to  that  of  MinSR,  as  the  extra
computations  for  SPRING  are  negligible  in  cost.   The  same  applies  to  MinSR+M.  For  all  three
of  these  methods,  the  computational  bottleneck  lies  in  computing  the  matrix T  =  ¯O ¯OT ,  which
has  asymptotic  complexity O(Np· N2s ).   This  cost  dominates  the O(N3s )  cost  of  the  Cholesky
factorization.
    Relative to KFAC, we expect the cost of SPRING to be highly dependent on the system size, the
number of MCMC samples per iteration, and the number of GPUs used to parallelize the calculation,
and we do not attempt to perform a systematic study along these lines.  In our experiments, we use


                                                             20
Figure 11:  Comparison of SPRING versus KFAC on the carbon atom without preliminary optimization.  We use the
previously tuned learning rate of η = 0.02 for both KFAC and SPRING.


a single GeForce RTX 2080Ti GPU with 1000 MCMC walkers.  With these particular settings, we
find that SPRING results in VMC iterations that are about 50% slower than KFAC for our smaller
systems such as the carbon atom.  As system size grows, the difference is reduced, and for the N2
molecule the VMC iterations with SPRING are only about 5% slower than with KFAC.


5.  Discussion

    Neural network wavefunctions represent a promising avenue towards highly accurate simulations
of small but challenging molecular systems.  The major bottleneck of applying such wavefunctions
is  the  high  cost  associated  with  their  optimization.   In  this  work  we  introduce  a  new  optimizer
called SPRING to alleviate this bottleneck.  SPRING combines ideas from the recently proposed
MinSR optimizer [26] with ideas from the randomized Kaczmarz method for solving overdetermined
least-squares problems [28].  By doing so, SPRING is able to utilize optimization history to improve
upon MinSR in a principled way at essentially no extra cost.  We test SPRING on several small
atoms and molecules, comparing it against MinSR, MinSR with momentum, and KFAC. We find
that SPRING consistently outperforms the alternatives across all tested systems.  We hope that
these findings will be extended to larger systems by future works.
    Due to several discrepancies between the VMC setting and the traditional Kaczmarz setting,
we  are  not  yet  able  to  furnish  a  rigorous  proof  of  convergence  for  the  SPRING  optimizer.   One
interesting direction for future research is to modify SPRING in a way that makes it possible to
prove its convergence.  For example, the exponentially convergent randomized Kaczmarz method
of  Strohmer  and  Vershynin  requires  that  the  rows  are  sampled  with  probability  proportional  to
the square of their Euclidean norm [28].  Furthermore, in the randomized block Kaczmarz method,
Needell and Tropp find that for optimal performance it is critical to partition the constraints of the
least-squares problem into well-conditioned blocks [29].  Such sampling schemes would represent a
significant departure from traditional VMC methods that sample from the probability density of
the wavefunction, but they could lead to rigorous convergence guarantees, better performance, or
both.  There are also variants of the Kaczmarz method such as the randomized extended Kaczmarz
algorithm of Zouzias and Freris [43] that can converge to the solution of inconsistent least-squares
problems.  This technique cannot be directly applied to the VMC setting since it requires sampling


                                                           21
the columns as well as the rows of the system.  However, it could serve as inspiration for further
development of the algorithm.
    We  also  draw  a  connection  between  the  MinSR  and  SPRING  methods  for  optimizing  neural
network wavefunctions and the efficient subsampled natural gradient descent method of Ren and
Goldfarb [25].  In particular, we show in Appendix   A that MinSR can be viewed as a simplified
implementation of the method of Ren and Goldfarb which applies as long as the gradient of the loss
function is a linear combination of the model gradients at the sampled points.  This is quite a com-
mon scenario in machine learning, occurring for example in supervised learning with a mean-squared
error loss function.  In such a setting, SPRING can then be viewed as a potential improvement to
existing subsampled natural gradient descent methods.  We leave it to future works to determine
whether SPRING can yield performance improvements for applications outside of VMC.


Acknowledgements

    This research used the Savio computational cluster resource provided by the Berkeley Research
Computing program at the University of California, Berkeley (supported by the UC Berkeley Chan-
cellor, Vice Chancellor for Research, and Chief Information Officer).  This material is based upon
work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific
Computing  Research,  Department  of  Energy  Computational  Science  Graduate  Fellowship  under
Award  Number(s)  DE-SC0023112  (G.G.).   This  effort  was  supported  by  the  SciAI  Center,  and
funded  by  the  Office  of  Naval  Research  (ONR),  under  Grant  Number  N00014-23-1-2729  (N.A.).
LL is a Simons Investigator in Mathematics.  We thank Yixiao Chen, Zhiyan Ding, Yuehaw Khoo,
Michael Lindsey, Eric Neuscamman, and Zaiwen Wen for their helpful discussions, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable comments.


Disclaimer

    This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States
Government.   Neither  the  United  States  Government  nor  any  agency  thereof,  nor  any  of  their
employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility
for  the  accuracy,  completeness,  or  usefulness  of  any  information,  apparatus,  product,  or  process
disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.  Reference herein to
any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by
the United States Government or any agency thereof.  The views and opinions of authors expressed
herein  do  not  necessarily  state  or  reflect  those  of  the  United  States  Government  or  any  agency
thereof.


References

 [1]WMC Foulkes, Lubos Mitas, RJ Needs, and Guna Rajagopal.  Quantum monte carlo simula-
     tions of solids.  Reviews of Modern Physics, 73(1):33, 2001.

 [2]Federico Becca and Sandro Sorella.      Quantum Monte Carlo approaches for correlated systems.
     Cambridge University Press, 2017.



                                                           22
 [3]David Pfau,  James S Spencer,  Alexander GDG Matthews,  and W Matthew C Foulkes.  Ab
     initio solution of the many-electron schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks.  Physical
     Review Research, 2(3):033429, 2020.

 [4]Jan Hermann, Zeno Sch¨atzle, and Frank No´e.  Deep-neural-network solution of the electronic
     schr¨odinger equation.  Nature Chemistry, 12(10):891–897, 2020.

 [5]Zeno Sch¨atzle, PB Szab´o, Mat˘ej Mezera, Jan Hermann, and Frank No´e.  Deepqmc:  An open-
     source software suite for variational optimization of deep-learning molecular wave functions.
     The Journal of Chemical Physics, 159(9), 2023.

 [6]Ingrid  von  Glehn,  James  S  Spencer,  and  David  Pfau.   A  self-attention  ansatz  for  ab-initio
     quantum chemistry.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13672, 2022.

 [7]Leon  Gerard,  Michael  Scherbela,  Philipp  Marquetand,  and  Philipp  Grohs.   Gold-standard
     solutions  to  the  schr¨odinger  equation  using  deep  learning:  How  much  physics  do  we  need?
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:10282–10294, 2022.

 [8]Gino Cassella, Halvard Sutterud, Sam Azadi, N. D. Drummond, David Pfau, James S. Spencer,
     and W. M. C. Foulkes. Discovering quantum phase transitions with fermionic neural networks.
     Phys. Rev. Lett., 130:036401, Jan 2023.

 [9]Jane Kim, Gabriel Pescia, Bryce Fore, Jannes Nys, Giuseppe Carleo, Stefano Gandolfi, Morten
     Hjorth-Jensen,  and  Alessandro  Lovato.   Neural-network  quantum  states  for  ultra-cold  fermi
     gases, 2023.
[10]Wan Tong Lou, Halvard Sutterud, Gino Cassella, W. M. C. Foulkes, Johannes Knolle, David
     Pfau, and James S. Spencer.  Neural wave functions for superfluids, 2023.

[11]Gabriel  Pescia,  Jannes  Nys,  Jane  Kim,  Alessandro  Lovato,  and  Giuseppe  Carleo.  Message-
     passing neural quantum states for the homogeneous electron gas, 2023.

[12]Xiang Li, Zhe Li, and Ji Chen.  Ab initio calculation of real solids via neural network ansatz.
     Nature Communications, 13(1):7895, 2022.

[13]Sandro Sorella. Generalized lanczos algorithm for variational quantum monte carlo.        Phys. Rev.
     B, 64:024512, Jun 2001.

[14]MP Nightingale and Vilen Melik-Alaverdian.  Optimization of ground-and excited-state wave
     functions and van der waals clusters.  Physical review letters, 87(4):043401, 2001.

[15]Sandro Sorella, Michele Casula, and Dario Rocca.  Weak binding between two aromatic rings:
     Feeling the van der waals attraction by quantum monte carlo methods. The Journal of chemical
     physics, 127(1), 2007.

[16]C.  J.  Umrigar,  Julien  Toulouse,  Claudia  Filippi,  S.  Sorella,  and  R.  G.  Hennig.   Alleviation
     of the fermion-sign problem by optimization of many-body wave functions.  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,
     98:110201, Mar 2007.

[17]Julien Toulouse and Cyrus J Umrigar.  Optimization of quantum monte carlo wave functions
     by energy minimization.  The Journal of chemical physics, 126(8), 2007.


                                                            23
[18]Eric Neuscamman, CJ Umrigar, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan.  Optimizing large parameter sets
     in variational quantum monte carlo.  Physical Review B, 85(4):045103, 2012.

[19]Luning Zhao and Eric Neuscamman.  A blocked linear method for optimizing large parameter
     sets in variational monte carlo.  Journal of chemical theory and computation, 13(6):2604–2611,
     2017.
[20]Iliya Sabzevari, Ankit Mahajan, and Sandeep Sharma.  An accelerated linear method for opti-
     mizing non-linear wavefunctions in variational monte carlo.  The Journal of chemical physics,
     152(2), 2020.

[21]Robert J Webber and Michael Lindsey.  Rayleigh-gauss-newton optimization with enhanced
     sampling for variational monte carlo.  Physical Review Research, 4(3):033099, 2022.
[22]James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approx-
     imate curvature.  In  International  conference  on  machine  learning, pages 2408–2417. PMLR,
     2015.

[23]Shun-Ichi Amari. Natural gradient works efficiently in learning.       Neural computation, 10(2):251–
     276, 1998.
[24]Frederik  Benzing.   Gradient  descent  on  neurons  and  its  link  to  approximate  second-order
     optimization.   In  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning,  pages  1817–1853.  PMLR,
     2022.

[25]Yi Ren and Donald Goldfarb. Efficient subsampled gauss-newton and natural gradient methods
     for training neural networks.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02353, 2019.
[26]Ao  Chen  and  Markus  Heyl.   Efficient  optimization  of  deep  neural  quantum  states  toward
     machine precision, 2023.

[27]Riccardo  Rende,  Luciano  Loris  Viteritti,  Lorenzo  Bardone,  Federico  Becca,  and  Sebastian
     Goldt. A simple linear algebra identity to optimize large-scale neural network quantum states.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05715, 2023.
[28]Thomas Strohmer and Roman Vershynin. A randomized kaczmarz algorithm with exponential
     convergence.  Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, 15(2):262–278, 2009.

[29]Deanna Needell and Joel A Tropp. Paved with good intentions: analysis of a randomized block
     kaczmarz method.  Linear Algebra and its Applications, 441:199–221, 2014.
[30]Jeffmin Lin, Gil Goldshlager, and Lin Lin.  VMCNet:  Flexible, general-purpose VMC frame-
     work, built on JAX.  http://github.com/jeffminlin/vmcnet, 2021.

[31]M. Born and R. Oppenheimer. Zur Quantentheorie der Molekeln.        Ann. der Phys. (4), 84:457–
     484, 1927.
[32]Jeffmin Lin, Gil Goldshlager, and Lin Lin.  Explicitly antisymmetrized neural network layers
     for variational monte carlo simulation.  Journal of Computational Physics, 474:111765, 2023.

[33]Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial
     neural networks.  Science, 355(6325):602–606, 2017.


                                                            24
[34]Giuseppe Carleo, Kenny Choo, Damian Hofmann, James ET Smith, Tom Westerhout, Fabien
     Alet,  Emily  J  Davis,  Stavros  Efthymiou,  Ivan  Glasser,  Sheng-Hsuan  Lin,  et  al.   Netket:  A
     machine learning toolkit for many-body quantum systems.  SoftwareX, 10:100311, 2019.

[35]Chae-Yeun  Park  and  Michael  J  Kastoryano.   Geometry  of  learning  neural  quantum  states.
     Physical Review Research, 2(2):023232, 2020.

[36]Guodong Zhang, James Martens, and Roger B Grosse.  Fast convergence of natural gradient
     descent for over-parameterized neural networks.   Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing
     Systems, 32, 2019.

[37]Stefan Karczmarz. Angenaherte auflosung von systemen linearer glei-chungen.        Bull. Int. Acad.
     Pol. Sic. Let., Cl. Sci. Math. Nat., pages 355–357, 1937.
[38]Deanna Needell.  Randomized kaczmarz solver for noisy linear systems.        BIT Numerical Math-
     ematics, 50:395–403, 2010.

[39]James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
     Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
     Zhang.  JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.

[40]Subhas J Chakravorty,  Steven R Gwaltney,  Ernest R Davidson,  Farid A Parpia,  and Char-
     lotte Froese p Fischer. Ground-state correlation energies for atomic ions with 3 to 18 electrons.
     Physical Review A, 47(5):3649, 1993.

[41]Claudia  Filippi  and  Cyrus  J  Umrigar.     Multiconfiguration  wave  functions  for  quantum
     monte  carlo  calculations  of  first-row  diatomic  molecules.   The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics,
     105(1):213–226, 1996.

[42]Robert  J  Le  Roy,  Yiye  Huang,  and  Calvin  Jary.   An  accurate  analytic  potential  function
     for ground-state n2 from a direct-potential-fit analysis of spectroscopic data.  The  Journal  of
     chemical physics, 125(16), 2006.

[43]Anastasios Zouzias and Nikolaos M Freris.  Randomized extended kaczmarz for solving least
     squares.  SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 34(2):773–793, 2013.

[44]Minghan Yang, Dong Xu, Zaiwen Wen, Mengyun Chen, and Pengxiang Xu. Sketch-based em-
     pirical natural gradient methods for deep learning.  Journal of Scientific Computing, 92(3):94,
     2022.

Appendix  A.  Connection to Efficient Subsampled Natural Gradient Descent

    Recall that MinSR with Tikhonov regularization uses the update formula

                                             dθ =  ¯OT λI +  ¯O ¯OT−1 ¯ϵ,                                                 (A.1)

where λ is the damping parameter.  This is the same formula that arises from the “simple linear
algebra  trick”  of  Rende  et  al  [25].   We  now  introduce  the  efficient  subsampled  natural  gradient
method of Ren and Goldfarb [25] and show how it is equivalent to MinSR in the VMC setting.  The
key idea of Ren and Goldfarb is that a damped Fisher matrix arising from a small minibatch can


                                                            25
be viewed as a low-rank perturbation of the identity and is thus amenable to inversion using the
Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula.  Using the notation of the later work by Yang et al [44], the
resulting update is

                                   dθ =  1λ   −I +U λI +UTU−1UT               g,

whereg is the gradient estimator and the columns ofU contain the model gradients divided by the
square-root of the number of samples used.
    Now  suppose,  as  is  often  the  case,  that  the  gradient  of  the  loss  function  is  simply  a  linear
combination of the gradients at each input, with some input-dependent scalar weights.  Then we
can write the gradient estimator as g =Uv for some column vectorv that depends on the sampled
inputs.  This allows us to simplify the NGD-SMW formula as follows:

               dθ =  1λ  −I +U λI +UTU−1UT Uv

                  =  1λ  −U +U λI +UTU−1UTU                  v

                  =  1λ  −U +U λI +UTU−1 λI +UTU−U λI +UTU−1 (λI)                                v

                  =−U λI +UTU−1v.

    Comparing with (A.1), we see that this is equivalent to the MinSR formula when we identify  ¯OT
with U  and ¯ϵ with v.  Furthermore, this identification is the natural one, since the columns of  ¯OT
represent the gradients of the logarithm of the normalized wavefunction and the formula g =  ¯OT ¯ϵ
holds in the VMC setting up to constant factors.  Thus,  the MinSR method can be viewed as a
simplified  way  of  implementing  the  efficient  subsampled  natural  gradient  method  in  the  context
of VMC. Furthermore, SPRING can be viewed as a potential improvement to subsampled natural
gradient descent and may have applications outside the VMC setting.


Appendix  B.  Network Architecture and Hyperparameters

    We list in Table B.2 the hyperparameters of the FermiNet architecture that we use in all our
experiments.  We list in Table B.3 the other settings used for our VMC training phase, in Table B.4
the settings used for our inference phase, and in Table B.5 the settings used for our preliminary
optimization.















                                                         26
                          Hyperparameter                     Value
                   One-electron stream width                  256
                   Two-electron stream width                   16
                  Number of equivariant layers                 4
                  Backflow activation function               tanh
                     Number of determinants                    16
                 Exponential envelope structure            Isotropic
                         Determinant type                   Dense

Table B.2:  List of FermiNet architecture hyperparameters used for all experiments.


                                 Setting                             Value
          Standard deviations for local energy clipping                 5
                          Number of walkers                           1000
                         MCMC burn-in steps                           5000
                          Training iterations                          1e5
                   MCMC steps between updates                          10

                 Table B.3:  List of settings for the training phase.


                                 Setting                                Value
                          Number of walkers                              2000
                  MCMC burn-in steps for C,N,O                           5000
                    MCMC burn-in steps for N2                            1e4
                          Inference iterations                           2e4
       MCMC steps between local energy measurements                       10

                 Table B.4:  List of settings for the inference phase.


                           Setting                                   Value
                         Optimizer                                   KFAC
                       Learning rate                                  0.05
                    Kernel initializers                           Orthogonal
                      Bias initializers                        Random normal
    Standard deviations for local energy clipping                       5
                    Number of walkers                                 1000
                  MCMC burn-in steps                                  5000
             Training iterations for C,N,O                            1000
               Training iterations for N2                             5000
            MCMC steps between updates                                 10

        Table B.5:  List of settings for the preliminary optimization phase.



                                          27