   Is a direct numerical simulation (DNS) of Navier-Stokes equations with small
                  enough grid spacing and time-step definitely reliable/correct?

                    Shijie Qinb, Yu Yangb, Yongxiang Huangc, Xinyu Meid, Lipo Wangd, Shijun Liaoa,b,∗

                                      aState Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, Shanghai 200240, China
                        bSchool of Ocean and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
   cState Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, College of Ocean and Earth Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China
                                dUM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, China





Abstract
Turbulence is strongly associated with the vast majority of fluid flows in nature and industry.  Traditionally, results
given by the direct numerical simulation (DNS) of Navier-Stokes (NS) equations that relate to a famous millennium
problem are widely regarded as ‘reliable’ benchmark solutions of turbulence, as long as grid spacing is fine enough (i.e.
less than the minimum Kolmogorov scale) and time-step is small enough, say, satisfying the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
condition (Courant number< 1). Is this really true? In this paper a two-dimensional sustained turbulent Kolmogorov
flow driven by an external body force governed by the NS equations under an initial condition with a spatial symmetry
is investigated numerically by the two numerical methods with detailed comparisons: one is the traditional DNS, the
other is the ‘clean numerical simulation’ (CNS). In theory, the exact solution must have a kind of spatial symmetry
since its initial condition is spatially symmetric.  However, it is found that numerical noises of the DNS are quickly
enlarged to the same level as the ‘true’ physical solution, which finally destroy the spatial symmetry of the flow field.
In other words, the DNS of the turbulent Kolmogorov flow governed by the NS equations are badly polluted mostly.
On the contrary, the numerical noise of the CNS is much smaller than the ‘true’ physical solution of turbulence in a
long enough interval of time so that the CNS result is very close to the ‘true’ physical solution and thus can remain
symmetric, which can be used as a benchmark solution for comparison.  Besides, it is found that numerical noise as
a kind of artificial tiny disturbances can lead to huge deviations at large scale on the two-dimensional Kolmogorov
turbulence governed by the NS equations, not only quantitatively (even in statistics) but also qualitatively (such as
spatial symmetry of flow).  This highly suggests that fine enough spatial grid spacing with small enough time-step
alone  could  not  guarantee  the  validity  of  the  DNS  of  the  NS  equations:  it  is  only  a  necessary  condition  but  not
sufficient.   All of these findings might challenge some of our general beliefs in turbulence:  for example,  it might
be wrong in physics to neglect the influences of small disturbances to NS equations.  Our results suggest that, from
physical point of view, it should be better to use the Landau-Lifshitz-Navier-Stokes (LLNS) equations, which consider
the influence of unavoidable thermal fluctuations, instead of the NS equations, to model turbulent flows.
Keywords:  Kolmogorov flow; statistical stability; computational reliability; clean numerical simulation; artificial
numerical noises;



1.  Introduction

    Turbulence is strongly associated with the vast majority of fluid flows in nature and industry [1,2,3]. Traditionally,
results given by the direct numerical simulation (DNS) of Navier-Stokes equations under various initial/boundary
conditions are widely regarded as ‘reliable’ benchmark solutions of turbulence,  as long as spatial grid spacing is
fine enough (i.e.  less than the minimum Kolmogorov scale) [4] and time-step is small enough, say, satisfying the
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition (Courant number< 1) [5]. Is this definitely true?




   ∗sjliao@sjtu.edu.cn


Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                                                                                                      May 1, 2024
    It is widely believed that turbulence flow, as a typical spatio-temporal chaotic system [1,4,3], has the famous
‘butterfly  effect’  [6, 7]:  microscopic  disturbances  in  turbulent  flows,  caused  by  either  thermal  fluctuations  or  en-
vironmental noises that are small-scale but unavoidable in practice,  might increase exponentially (and quickly) to
macroscopic levels [8,9,10,11].  Recently, Qin and Liao [12] provided a rigorous evidence that numerical noise
as a kind of tiny artificial stochastic disturbances can indeed increase quickly to the same order of magnitude of the
‘true’ physical solution of a two-dimensional sustained turbulent Rayleigh-B´enard convection, and in addition can
have quantitative and qualitative large-scale influences in statistics, and even might lead to different types of flow.
    Note that numerical noises, i.e. truncation error and round-off error, always exist and are practically unavoidable
in each result given by the ‘direct numerical simulation’ (DNS). Unfortunately, as mentioned above, due to the chaotic
property of turbulence [13,14], the tiny numerical noises as a kind of micro-level disturbances increase exponentially
(and thus quickly) to a macroscopic level, therefore each DNS result of turbulent flow is a kind of mixture of ‘true’
physical solution (denoted by  p) and ‘false’ numerical noise (denoted by δ) that are mostly at the same order of
magnitude,  i.e.   p ∼ δ,  as  currently  illustrated  by  Qin  and  Liao  [12]  using  a  two-dimensional  Rayleigh-B      ´enard
turbulent flow as an example by means of the so-called ‘clean numerical simulation’ (CNS) [15,16,17,18,19,12].
For investigations on turbulence, statistic properties are more important than spatio-temporal trajectory of numerical
simulation. It is a pity that, traditionally, the ‘true’ solution p is unknown so that one had to use the the badly polluted
simulation, i.e.  the above-mentioned mixture  p +δ, to gain statistic results⟨p +δ⟩, where⟨⟩ denotes an operator
of statistics.  Unfortunately, this is based on such a ‘hypothesis’ that⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩, say, the statistics is stable under
disturbances,  where  p denotes the ‘true’ physical solution.  But,  as illustrated by Liao [16], this hypothesis is       not
definitely true for many chaotic systems [18,19] and even some turbulent flows:  the DNS results of a kind of two-
dimensional Rayleigh-B´enard turbulent flow are quite different from these given by CNS not only in statistics but also
even in type of flow [12].
    Here, let us briefly describe the basic idea of the CNS. In order to obtain a ‘convergent’ (or reproducible) numerical
simulation (i.e.  a result very close to ‘true’ solution  p) of chaotic dynamical systems [6,2,20,21,22], Liao [15]
proposed a new numerical strategy, namely the ‘clean numerical simulation’ (CNS) [15,23,24,16,17,18,19,12], to
reduce the background numerical noise (i.e. the truncation error and round-off error) so greatly that numerical noise is
negligible (say, the ‘false’ numerical noiseδ is much smaller than the ‘true’ physical solution p, i.e.|δ|≪|p|) during
a finite but long enough interval of time t∈ [0, Tc], where Tc is the so-called ‘critical predictable time’.  In the frame
of the CNS, temporal and spatial truncation errors can be decreased to a required small level by means of the Taylor
expansion with a high enough order in the temporal dimension and a fine enough discretization in the spatial dimension
(such as the high-order spatial Fourier expansion), respectively.  Besides, all of the physical/numerical variables and
parameters must be in the multiple precision (MP) [25] with a large enough number of significant digits so that the
round-off error can be decreased to a required small level. Moreover, an additional numerical simulation with the even
smaller numerical noise of the same chaotic system is required to determine the value of Tc via a comparison with
the previous CNS result so that the corresponding numerical noise of the simulation could be negligible and thus this
computer-generated simulation is convergent/reproducible within the whole spatial domain in the temporal interval
[0, Tc].  In this way, unlike other traditional numerical algorithms using double precision, the CNS can give reliable
numerical simulation of a chaotic system in a finite but long enough interval of time, say, the CNS result is so close
to the ‘true’ physical solution p that one can gain its statistics⟨p⟩ accurately.  Here, it should be emphasized that the
so-called ‘critical predictable time’ denoted by Tc is a very important concept in the frame of the CNS: unlike DNS
results whose interval of time can be as long as one would like without considering the influences of the exponential
increase of numerical noises,  CNS can give a reliable result only in a finite but long enough interval of time,  i.e.
t∈ [0, Tc]. So, for the first time, the CNS provides us a tool to carefully check the hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ for chaotic
systems and turbulent flows, where p +δ on the left hand side denotes numerical simulations given by a traditional
numerical method using double precision (such as DNS), and  p on the right-hand side can be accurately gained by
means of the CNS, respectively.
    Up to now, the CNS has been successfully applied to many chaotic dynamical systems, such as Lorenz system
[15,26], the famous three-body problem [24,27,28,29,30], H                                    ´enon-Heiles chaotic system [23], hyperchaotic R      ¨ossler
system [31,32], a chaotic free-fall disk [33], Arnold-Beltrami-Childress (ABC) flow [34], the complex Ginzburg-
Landau equation (CGLE) [18], the damped driven sine-Gordon equation (SGE) [19], the two-dimensional turbulent
Rayleigh-B´enard convection [12], and so on.  It was found that the hypothesis  ⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ indeed holds for many
chaotic systems and turbulent flows, say, their statistics are stable, which are called ‘normal-chaos’. But, it was found
                                                                          2
that the hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ does not hold for some chaotic systems and turbulent flows, say, their statistics are
unstable to small disturbances, which are called ‘ultra-chaos’ [31,34,35,36]. The ultra-chaos as a brand-new concept
might greatly deepen and enrich our understandings about chaos as well as turbulence.
    In this paper, let us further consider a two-dimensional turburlent flow of viscous fluid, driven by an external body
forcing that is stationary, monochromatic, and sinusoidally varying in space.  This kind of flow was first introduced
by Kolmogorov in 1959 [37], called ‘Kolmogorov flow’ and usually regarded as a mathematically and experimentally
tractable flow model whose instability [38,39,40,41], global stability [42], chaotic property [13,14], and turbulent
state [43,44,45] have been investigated in details. The Kolmogorov flow can be practically realized in the laboratory
by  means  of  the  magnetohydrodynamics  (MHD)  [46, 47, 48]  or  in  a  soap  film  [49].   Furthermore,  due  to  some
additional physical factors such as the Coriolis term (i.e.  the effect of the planetary rotation) [50,51], the bottom
friction [52,53,54], and the stratification [41,55], Kolmogorov flows have also been widely studied in geophysical
fluid dynamics.
    In this investigation, we compare the CNS result of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence with that given
by a traditional DNS using double precision. In this way, we can check the hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ in details, where
the left-hand side is given by the DNS, and the right-hand side is given by the CNS, respectively.  The mathematical
model is described in § 2, the detailed comparisons between CNS and DNS result are given in § 3, and the discus-
sions and conclusions are given in § 4, respectively.  As reported in § 3, numerical noises as a kind of small-scale
disturbances have huge influences on large-scale properties of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence not only
in spatio-temporal trajectories and its spatial symmetry but also in various statistics.  Especially, it is found that the
hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ does not stand up for the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration, say,
the fine enough spatial grid spacing with small enough time-step cannot guarantee the validity of the DNS: it is only
a necessary condition but not sufficient.

2.  Mathematical model and numerical strategy

2.1.  Governing equation and initial/boundary conditions
    Consider an incompressible flow in a domain [0, L]× [0, L] under the so-called ‘Kolmogorov forcing’, which is
stationary, monochromatic, and sinusoidally varying in space, with an integer nK  describing the forcing scale andχ
representing the corresponding forcing amplitude per unit mass of fluid [45].  Using the length scale       L/2π and the
time scale pL/2πχ, the non-dimensional governing equation of this two-dimensional Kolmogorov flow in the form
of stream function reads
                                           ∂   ∇2ψ  + ∂(ψ,∇2ψ)
                                          ∂t                ∂(x, y) −  1Re∇4ψ + nK cos(nKy) = 0,                                                (1)
where x and y are horizontal and vertical coordinates with x, y∈ [0, 2π], t denotes the time, the stream functionψ is
defined by

                                                           u =−∂ψ∂y,            v = ∂ψ∂x,                                                                     (2)

u and v represent horizontal and vertical velocities, Re is the Reynolds number defined by
                                                                        √      L     3
                                                                Re =       χ        2 ,                                                                           (3)
                                                                         ν     2π
ν denotes the kinematic viscosity,∇2 is the Laplace operator with the definition∇4 =∇2∇2, and

                                                            ∂(a, b)          ∂b         ∂a
                                                            ∂(x, y)  = ∂a∂x  ∂y− ∂b∂x   ∂y                                                                     (4)

is the Jacobi operator, respectively. Note that the stream-functionψ satisfies the periodic condition on the boundary

                                              ψ(0, y, t) =ψ(2π, y, t),  ψ(x, 0, t) =ψ(x, 2π, t).                                                    (5)
                                                                           3
    Following Chandler and Kerswell [45], we choose the physical parameters in (1) as follows:

                                                           nK = 4,            Re = 40,                                                                      (6)

with the initial condition
                                                ψ(x, y, 0) =−1n cos(x + y) + cos(x− y)o,                                                        (7)
                                                                  2
corresponding to a sustained turbulent Kolmogorov flow.
    Note that there exists a kind of spatial symmetry in the initial condition (7). According to the governing equation
(1), the periodic boundary condition (5) and the initial condition (7) with the spatial symmetry, it is straight forward
that the solution of the corresponding NS equations should be in the form of a series

                                                 +∞X +∞Xam,n(t) cos(mx + ny) + bm,n(t) cos(mx− ny)	,                                      (8)
                                  ψ(x, y, t) =
                                                m=0  n=1
where  am,n(t)  and  bm,n  are  unknown  coefficients  dependent  upon  the  time  t.   Therefore,  the  exact  solution  of  the
Navier-Stokes equations have the spatial symmetry

                                             ψ(x, y, t) =ψ(−x,−y, t) =ψ(2π− x, 2π− y, t),                                                     (9)

although the coefficients am,n(t) and bm,n in (8) are unknown. Thus, the loss of such kind of spatial symmetry clearly
indicates the large deviation from the true solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. This is exactly the reason why we
choose the periodic boundary condition (5) and the initial condition (7) with the spatial symmetry!

2.2.  Strategy of CNS
    First of all,  let us simply describe the strategy of CNS. The CNS is used to greatly decrease the background
numerical noise, i.e.  the truncation and round-off errors, to such a required tiny level that the corresponding ‘false’
numerical noise of the simulation is much smaller than, and thus negligible compared with, the ‘true’ physical solution
of the considered Kolmogorov flow in an interval of time that is long enough for statistics.  In this way, a convergent
(reproducible) and reliable numerical result of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence can be obtained, which
is used here as the ‘clean’ and ‘true’ benchmark solution.  Briefly speaking, to decrease the spatial truncation error
of  the  simulation  to  a  small  enough  level,  we  discretize  the  spatial  domain  of  the  flow  field  by  a  uniform  mesh
Nx× Ny = 256× 256, and adopt the Fourier spectral method for spatial approximation with the 3/2 rule for dealiasing.
The corresponding spatial resolution is high enough for the Kolmogorov flow under consideration: the grid spacing is
less than the minimum instantaneous Kolmogorov scale [4], as shown later in § 3.5. Besides, to decrease the temporal
truncation error to a required small enough level, we use the 60th-order (i.e.  M = 60) Taylor expansion with a time-
step ∆t =  1× 10−3.  Furthermore, in order to decrease the round-off error to a required small enough level, we use
multiple precision with 200 significant digits (i.e.  Ns = 200) for all physical/numerical variables and parameters.  In
addition, the self-adaptive CNS strategy [32] is adopted to dramatically reduce the calculation amount. Similarly, we
run another CNS using the same Fourier spectral method with the same uniform spatial mesh but having the even
smaller temporal truncation error and round-off error by means of a higher-order (i.e. M = 62) Taylor expansion with
the same time-step (∆t  =  1× 10−3) and the higher multiple precision with more significant digits (i.e.  Ns  =  205).
Comparing these two CNS results by means of the so-called ‘spectrum-deviation’δs(t) whose definition is given in
§ 2.3, it is found that δs <  10−19  is satisfied throughout the whole simulation 0≤  t≤  1500, say, these two CNS
results have no distinct difference in an interval of time 0≤  t≤  1500 that is long enough for calculating statistics.
This verifies the convergence and reliability of our CNS result in t∈ [0, 1500] given by means of M = 60, ∆t = 10−3
and  Ns  =  200,  which can be regarded as a ‘clean’ benchmark result,  since it is very close to the ‘true’ physical
solution of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration. For details about the CNS algorithm of
the Kolmogorov turbulence, please refer to Appendix A.
    On the other hand, in the case of the same initial condition (7) and the     same physical parameters (6), the same
governing equation (1) is solved numerically in     t∈  [0, 1500] by a traditional DNS algorithm, i.e.  the fourth-order

                                                                          4
Runge-Kutta’s method with the double precision using the time-step ∆t  =  10−4, whose numerical noise increases
exponentially (and quickly) up to the same order of magnitude of the ‘true’ physical solution and thus can not be
negligible thereafter. Therefore, the corresponding DNS result becomes a mixture of the ‘true’ physical solution and
the ‘false’ numerical noise,  which are mostly at the same order of magnitude.   Then,  comparing this DNS result
with the CNS benchmark solution, we can investigate the influence of numerical noises as tiny artificial stochastic
disturbances on the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in details.
    For  both  of  DNS  and  CNS,  the  grid  spacing  is  fine  enough,  i.e.   satisfying  the  spacing  criterion  [4],  and  the
time-steps are small enough, i.e. satisfying the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition [5], as shown in § 3.5 in details.

2.3.  Some measures of the flow
    For the sake of simplicity,  the definitions of some statistic operators are briefly described below.   The spatial
average is defined by
                                                                           Z   2π Z   2π
                                                            ⟨⟩A =   14π2
                                                                             0      0    dxdy                                                                  (10)
and the spatiotemporal average (along the x direction) is defined by
                                                                                 Z   2π Z   T2
                                                      ⟨⟩x,t =          12π(T2− T1)
                                                                                   0      T1   dxdt,                                                          (11)
respectively, where T1 = 200 and T2 = 1500 are chosen in §3corresponding to a long enough temporal interval, as
well as a relatively stable state of the flow. Besides, the spatiotemporal average (over the whole field) is defined by
                                                                           Z   2π Z   2π Z   T2
                                                 ⟨⟩ =           14π2(T2− T1)
                                                                             0      0      T1   dxdydt,                                                     (12)
where different values of T1 and T2 correspond to different integral intervals of time.
    For the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration, vorticity is expanded as the Fourier series

                                                                    ⌊Nx/3⌋X    ⌊Ny/3⌋X
                               ω(x, y, t) =∇2ψ(x, y, t) =                                Ωm,n(t) exp(i mx) exp(i ny),                               (13)
                                                                 m=−⌊Nx/3⌋   n=−⌊Ny/3⌋

where m,  n are integers,⌊⌋ stands for a floor function,  i  = √−1 denotes the imaginary unit,  and for dealiasing
Ωm,n = 0 is imposed for wavenumbers outside the above domain P, respectively. Note that, whenω is a real number,
Ω−m,−n = Ω∗m,n must be satisfied, where Ω∗m,n is the conjugate of Ωm,n. The enstrophy spectrum is defined by
                                                                         X             Ωm,n(t)2,                                                           (14)
                                                      Bl(t) =

                                                                l−1/2≤√m2+n2<l+1/2
where the wave number l is a non-negative integer. In addition, for two different numerical results that give different
enstrophy spectrum Bl(t) and B′l(t), respectively, where B′l(t) corresponds to the simulation with smaller numerical
noise, we define the so-called ‘spectrum-deviation’
                                                                        P   Bl(t)− B′l(t)
                                                             δs(t) =    l=0   P


                                                                             l=0 B′l(t)                                                                           (15)
to measure the deviation of the simulation corresponding to Bl(t), from the other corresponding to B′l(t), at a given
time t.
    In § 3, we will focus on the kinetic energy

                                                      E(x, y, t) =  12[u2(x, y, t) + v2(x, y, t)]                                                          (16)

                                                                             5
and the kinetic energy dissipation rate
                                                                X    ∂iu j(x, y, t) +∂ jui(x, y, t)2,                                                 (17)
                                           D(x, y, t) =    12Re
                                                                 i j

where i, j = 1, 2, u1 = u, u2 = v,∂1 =∂/∂x, and∂2 =∂/∂y, respectively.


3.  Influence of numerical noises as tiny disturbances

    As mentioned in §2.2,  comparing the DNS result,  which is a mixture of the ‘true’ physical solution and the
‘false’ numerical noise that are mostly at the same order of magnitude, with the CNS benchmark solution, whose
‘false’ numerical noises are negligible and thus which is very close to its ‘true’ physical solution in a finite but long
enough interval of time,  we can investigate in details the influence of numerical noise as a kind of tiny artificial
stochastic disturbances on the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration. Some results of detailed
comparisons are shown in this section.

3.1.  Trajectory, spatial symmetry and statistics
    As shown in Figure1and2, the DNS results of vorticity         ω defined by (13) at di     fferent time t are compared with
the corresponding ‘clean’ benchmark solution given by the CNS. Note that the flow states given by DNS and CNS
are completely the same at the beginning times such as t = 90, as shown in Figure1(a) and (b), when the numerical
noise of the DNS result has not yet increased to the same order of magnitude of the ‘true’ physical solution so that
the macroscopic deviation between DNS and CNS cannot be observed by eyes. It should be emphasized that, for both
results given by the DNS and the CNS up to t = 90, there exists a kind of spatial symmetry, as shown in Figure1(a)
and (b).   So,  the DNS result in t ∈  [0, 90] should be close enough to the ‘true’ physical solution.   Unfortunately,
the corresponding interval of time is too short for calculations of statistics.  As the time increases, for instances at
t  =  110 and t  =  120, the deviation between the DNS result from the CNS benchmark solution becomes more and
more obvious, as shown in Figure1(e)-(h). To clearly indicate this deviation, let us consider the normalized absolute
error of the vorticity between DNS result and the CNS benchmark solution, defined by
                                                           R  2πR  2π
                                                   δω =     0   R  2π0 |ωDNS−ωCNS| dxdyR  2π   ,                                                           (18)

                                                                 0    0 |ωCNS| dxdy
whereωDNS  andωCNS  denote the vorticity given by the DNS and CNS, respectively.  It is found that the normalized
absolute errors of the vorticity, denoted byδω, are 0.006 at t = 90, 0.06 at t = 100, 0.49 at t = 110 and 1.12 at t = 120,
respectively. Note that, when t≥ 120, the vorticity field given by the DNS completely losses the spatial symmetry, but
the vorticity field given by the CNS benchmark solution always keeps such kind of spatial symmetry even at t = 1500,
as shown in Figure2.  Note that the ‘false’ numerical noise of the CNS benchmark result is much smaller than its
‘true’ physical solution and thus is negligible compared to the ‘true’ physical solution in the whole interval of time
t∈ [0, 1500]. However, when t≥ 120, the ‘false’ numerical noise of the DNS result is at the same order of magnitude
as the ‘true’ physical solution, as shown in Figure3, say, thereafter the DNS result is             badly polluted, which naturally
leads to the loss of the spatial symmetry and a large-scale illustrative deviation in the flow field from the ‘true’ physical
solution! The quantitative comparisons of the field geometrical structures will be given in § 3.2.
    As mentioned in § 2.2, the exact solution of the Navier-Stokes equations considered in this paper have the spatial
symmetry (9). Note that the result given by the CNS indeed has this kind of spatial symmetry in the    whole interval of
time t∈ [0, 1500]. But, unfortunately, the result given by the DNS loses such kind of spatial symmetry when t> 120,
as shown in Figs.1and2, because the numerical noises, which have                   no spatial symmetry, have been enlarged to the
same order of magnitude as the ‘true’ solution and thus finally destroy this kind of spatial symmetry of the flow field.
This is a clear and rigorous evidence that the numerical results given by the DNS are indeed “badly polluted” when
t> 120.
    How about the influences of the numerical noises as a kind of artificial tiny disturbances in statistics?  First of
all, let us consider the spatially averaged kinetic energy dissipation rate⟨D⟩A, where⟨⟩A is an operator of statistics

                                                                         6
Figure 1: Comparisons of the vorticity fieldω of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence governed by (1) in the case of    nK = 4 and Re = 40
with the same initial condition (7) given by the CNS (left) and DNS (right), respectively, at the di   fferent times.  (a)-(b):t = 90; (c)-(d):  t = 100;
(e)-(f): t = 110; (g)-(h): t = 120.

                                                                                           7
Figure 2: Comparisons of the vorticity fieldω of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence governed by (1) in the case of    nK = 4 and Re = 40
with the same initial condition (7) given by the CNS (left) and DNS (right), respectively, at the di   fferent times. (a)-(b): t = 500; (c)-(d): t = 1500.




























Figure 3: The normalized absolute errorδω, defined by (18), and the spectrum-deviation   δs, defined by (15), of the vorticity field given by the DNS
of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence governed by (1) in the case of    nK  = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), compared to the
CNS benchmark solution. Red solid line: the normalized absolute errorδω; blue dash line: the spectrum-deviationδs.



                                                                                           8
Figure 4:  Comparison of the spatially averaged kinetic energy dissipation rate⟨D⟩A of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence governed by
(1) in the case of    nK = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7) given by the CNS benchmark result (solid line in red), the DNS result (solid line
in black), the previous study by Chandler and Kerswell [45] (solid line in blue).



defined by (10), and      D denotes the kinetic energy dissipation rate defined by (17), respectively. As shown in Figure4,
when t > 150,⟨D⟩A given by the CNS (with a approximate average 0.25) is obviously higher than that given by the
DNS (with a approximate average 0.1), where the deviation of nearly 2.5 times in magnitude clearly reveals the large
differences.  Note that our DNS result is in accord with the DNS ones given by Chandler and Kerswell [45], which
is also a mixture of the ‘true’ physical solution and the ‘false’ numerical noise that are mostly at the same order of
magnitude.
    Let us further consider the Fourier coefficient Ωm,n of the vorticity field ω defined by (13) at the time       t  =  500,
corresponding to Figure2(a) and (b).  As shown in Figure5, when                          m is an odd number such as m =  1 or m =  3,
Re(Ωm,n) given by the CNS benchmark solution is always zero when n is an even number, but Re(Ωm,n) given by the
DNS is not zero for all n, where Re( ) is an operator that takes the real part of a complex number. On the other hand,
when m is an even number such as m = 0 or m = 2, Re(Ωm,n) given by the CNS is zero when n is an odd number, but
Re(Ωm,n) given by the DNS is not zero nearly for all n (except Ω0,0 = 0), as shown in Figure6.  Besides, it is found
that, when Re(Ωm,n) given by the CNS are not zero, their values are usually an order of magnitude larger than those
given by the DNS. In addition, the imaginary part Im(Ωm,n) given by the CNS is always zero for all values of m and n,
but this is not found in the DNS result, where Im( ) is an operator that takes the imaginary part of a complex number.
These are mainly because the ‘false’ numerical noises of the DNS quickly increase to the same order of magnitude of
the ‘true’ physical solution of the vorticity field, which certainly leads to the large-scale huge deviation from the CNS
benchmark solution! All of these can clearly explain why the DNS result losses the spatial symmetry when t> 120.
    Furthermore, the DNS results of the enstrophy spectrum Bl defined by (14) of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov
turbulence have also huge deviation from the CNS benchmark solution, as shown in Figure7and Figure8. The time
histories of the enstrophy spectrums at some wave numbers, such as B1(t) and B50(t) as shown in Figure7(a) and (b),
respectively, present the apparent sensitivity to numerical noises as a kind of artificial tiny disturbances: the average
value (about 1.13) of B1(t) given by the DNS is larger than that (about 0.60) given by the CNS, but B1(t) given by
the CNS has larger variation range, which means that the flow given by the DNS contains more kinetic energy at the
macroscopical scale and has a higher auto-correlation (that will be shown later in detail); On the contrary, the average
value (about 6.0× 10−12) of B50(t) given by the CNS are about 4 times larger than that (about 1.5× 10−12) given by
the DNS, indicating that the flow given by the CNS has more energy at the microscopical scale.  These phenomena
can be well explained by the obvious difference between the kinetic energy dissipation rates given by the CNS and
DNS, as shown in Figure4. Besides, at some typical times such as             t = 500 and t = 1500 as shown in Figure8(a) and

                                                                         9
                                                     (a)                                                                       (b)

Figure 5:  Comparisons of (a)|Re(Ω1,n)| and (b)|Re(Ω3,n)| of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence at t =  500 in the case of nK  =  4 and
Re = 40 with the the initial condition (7), where the Fourier coe   fficient Ωm,n of the vorticityω defined by (13) is given either by the CNS benchmark
solution (solid triangle in red) or the DNS result (odd n: empty circle in black, even n: solid circle in black). Here Re(a) denotes the real part of the
complex number a,|a| represents the absolute value of a, respectively.






















                                                     (a)                                                                       (b)

Figure 6:  Comparisons of (a)|Re(Ω0,n)| and (b)|Re(Ω2,n)| of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence at t =  500 in the case of nK  =  4 and
Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), where    Ωm,n of the vorticityω defined by (13) is given either by the CNS benchmark solution (solid triangle
in red) or the DNS result (even n: empty circle in black, odd n: solid circle in black).









                                                                                           10
                                                    (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 7: Comparisons of the enstrophy spectrums at certain wavenumbers, i.e. (a) B1 and (b) B50, of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence
in the case of nK = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), given by the CNS (red) and the DNS (black), respectively.






















                                                    (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 8: Comparisons of the enstrophy spectrums Bl at (a) t = 500 and (b) t = 1500 of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of
nK = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), given by the CNS (triangle in red) and the DNS (circle in black), respectively.











                                                                                         11
                                                    (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 9:  Comparisons of the probability density function (PDF) of (a) the kinetic energy  E(x, y, t) and (b) the kinetic energy dissipation rate
D(x, y, t) of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK  = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), given by the CNS (red)
and the DNS (black), respectively, where PDFs are integrated in x, y∈ [0, 2π] and t∈ [200, 1500].






















                                                    (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 10: Comparisons of the vertical distributions of (a) the spatio-temporal averaged kinetic energy⟨E⟩x,t and (b) the spatio-temporal averaged
kinetic energy dissipation rate⟨D⟩x,t of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK  = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition
(7), respectively, given by the CNS (red) and the DNS (black).










                                                                                         12
                                                    (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 11: Comparisons of the PDF of (a) the horizontal velocity u(x, y, t) and (b) the vertical velocity v(x, y, t) of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov
turbulence in the case of nK = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), respectively, given by the CNS (red) and the DNS (black).























Figure 12: Comparison of the PDF of the vorticityω of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK  = 4 and Re = 40 with the
initial condition (7), respectively, given by the CNS (red) and the DNS (black).











                                                                                         13
(b), respectively, as l increases, deviation between the spectrum Bl given by the DNS and CNS benchmark solution
becomes larger and larger, and when l > 10 the values of Bl given by the CNS are obviously higher than that given
by the DNS. Note that these agree with the results in Figure5and Figure6.  It suggests that, for the relatively larger
wave number (i.e.  smaller turbulent structure), the flow given by the CNS should contain more kinetic energy than
the DNS, which is reasonable considering the apparently higher kinetic energy dissipation rate of the CNS as shown
in Figure4.  In summary, the numerical noises as a kind of artificial tiny disturbances lead to huge deviations of the
enstrophy spectrum given by the DNS from the CNS benchmark solution, on both of large and small scales, as shown
in Figure7and Figure8.
    The comparisons of the probability density function (PDF) of the kinetic energy E defined by (16) and the kinetic
energy dissipation rate D defined by (17) given by the CNS and DNS are as shown in Figure9(a) and (b), respectively.
Note that in the whole paper x, y∈ [0, 2π] and t∈ [200, 1500] are used to calculate the PDFs.  Near E≈ 1, the DNS
result has a larger probability of the distribution than the CNS benchmark solution, as shown in Figure9(a).  For
large D, the CNS benchmark solution has a larger probability of the distribution than the DNS result, as shown in
Figure9(b).  The comparisons of the vertical distributions of the spatio-temporal averaged kinetic energy    ⟨E⟩x,t and
the spatio-temporal averaged kinetic energy dissipation rate⟨D⟩x,t  given by the CNS and DNS, respectively, are as
shown in Figure10, where    ⟨⟩x,t is an operator of statistics defined by (11). Note that the DNS result mostly has larger
⟨E⟩x,t  than the CNS benchmark solution, but⟨D⟩x,t  given by the CNS is several times larger than that of the DNS.
Besides, although the PDF of the horizontal velocity u(x, y, t) given by the DNS is close to that given by the CNS,
the PDF of the vertical velocity v(x, y, t) given by the DNS is quite different from that given by the CNS, as shown in
Figure11. In addition, the PDF of the vorticity      ω(x, y, t) given by the CNS and DNS are also distinctly different: the
vorticityω given by the DNS is more concentrated on zero, as shown in Figure12.
    All of the above-mentioned comparisons between the CNS benchmark solution and the DNS result clearly indicate
that tiny disturbances, resulting from the micro-level background numerical noise, can lead to huge deviations on both
of large and small scales not only in spatio-temporal trajectory of the flow field but also in spatial symmetry of the
vorticity field as well as statistics of many physical quantities, such as the enstrophy spectrum, the spatio-temporal
average and PDFs of the velocity, vorticity, kinetic energy, and kinetic energy dissipation rate of the two-dimensional
Kolmogorov turbulence considered in this paper.

3.2.  Field geometrical structures
    Based on the aforementioned investigation, the evolution of the flow field can also be observed through the changes
in field geometrical structures. For the non-local statistics related to the topology of flow field, the main challenge lies
in the quantitative (rather than illustrative) structure identification, which is relatively rare in the existing literature. To
overcome this challenge, a novel attempt for the natural decomposition of scalar fields is the dissipation element (DE)
analysis [56,57,58].  The corresponding DE structures, as a representation of the whole flow field, are space-filling
and able to effectively capture and portray the flow dynamics across the entire field.  Additionally, the utilization of
the DE analysis approach can avoid the defect of the so-called scale-mixing effect [56], which is often encountered in
traditional structure function analyses.
    Specifically, starting from any spatial point in a (large enough) scalar field, along with its descending and ascending
directions of the scalar gradient trajectory, one can inevitably reach a local minimum point and a local maximum point,
respectively. The ensemble of spatial points whose gradient trajectories share the same pair of extremal points define
a DE unit, and thus the DE structures consisting of several DE units can represent the whole flow field. Typically, the
length scale of each DE unit can be parameterized with l, say, the linear distance between the two extremal points.
For a deeper understanding of the properties and applications of the DE analysis, please refer to [56,57,58,59].
    Applying the DE analysis on both the CNS benchmark solution and the DNS result, without loss of generality,
for the instantaneous vertical velocity field v(x, y) at t = 500, the difference between topological properties of these
two flow fields can be revealed, as shown in Figure13:  the local maximal and minimal points are represented by
the red and blue dots respectively and the DE boundaries are shown in yellow solid lines.  Note that here we choose
the vertical velocity field rather than the horizontal one mainly for exhibiting an obvious deviation between the CNS
benchmark solution and the DNS result, which corresponds to the results shown in Figure11.  At this moment, the
sizes of the DE structures for the DNS result are generally larger than those given by the CNS in the same fixed
computational domain. Quantitatively, on the one hand, the evolution of the averaged length scale, i.e.⟨l⟩, of the DE
units (obtained by means of each instantaneous vertical velocity field) is shown in Figure14(a), which indicates that
                                                                       14
                                                   (a)                                                                     (b)

Figure 13:  Illustration of the dissipation element (DE) structures on the instantaneous vertical velocity field v(x, y) at t  =  500 for (a) the CNS
benchmark solution or (b) the DNS result, where color represents the magnitude of v, the DE boundaries are shown in yellow solid lines, and the
extremal points are marked by red (maximum) and blue (minimum) dots.






















                                                   (a)                                                                     (b)

Figure 14:  Comparison of the time histories of (a) averaged length scale⟨l⟩ of the DE units or (b) total number Num of the DE units, where the
corresponding DE structures are obtained by means of the instantaneous vertical velocity field given by the CNS (red) or the DNS (black).










                                                                                        15
                                           (a)                                                          (b)





















                                           (c)                                                          (d)

Figure 15:  Time histories of⟨E⟩A  and⟨D⟩A  of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK  =  4 and Re =  40 with the initial
condition (7) given by the (a)-(b) CNS and (c)-(d) DNS in    t∈ [700, 1200], respectively, where the period of time 870< t< 970 corresponds to the
intermittent stability of Kolmogorov turbulence.



the averaged length scales at different time moments given by the DNS are generally larger than those of the CNS
benchmark solution after an initial period of time.  On the other hand, Figure14(b) illustrates that the total number
(denoted by Num) of the DE units (obtained likewise via each instantaneous vertical velocity field) given by the DNS
is less than that given by the CNS most of the time, which is a natural result corresponding to the difference between
length scales mentioned above. Note that all of these results can be explained from a perspective of the kinetic energy
dissipation rate (as shown in Figure4and Figure9(b)):  considering the definition of a DE unit, the lower kinetic
energy dissipation rate given by the DNS usually corresponds to the smoother and larger DE structures.
    In summary, the numerical noises as a kind of artificial tiny disturbances leads to quantitatively large deviations
on the field geometrical structures of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration.

3.3.  Intermittent stability
    According  to  the  time  histories  of⟨E⟩A  and⟨D⟩A  in  t ∈  [700, 1200]  given  by  the  CNS  benchmark  solution,
as shown in Figure15(a) and (b),  there exists a short period of time,  for example,  870       <  t <  970,  in which the
two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence is in a relatively stable state, corresponding to an intermittent stability of
turbulence [60,61,62].  Note that the vorticity fields       ω given by the CNS benchmark solution at t =  900, t =  920,

                                                                          16
                                                     (a)                                                                       (b)





















                                                     (c)                                                                       (d)

Figure 16: Vorticity fieldω of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7) given
by the CNS in the state of the intermittent stability at (a) t = 900, (b) t = 920, (c) t = 940, and (d) t = 960.













                                                                                          17
t = 940, and t = 960 are almost unchanged, as shown in Figure16(a)-(d).  By contrast, the corresponding vorticity
fields given by the DNS has no such kind of intermittent stability of turbulence in the whole period of simulation!
    It should be emphasized that the DNS result quickly becomes a mixture of the ‘false’ numerical noiseδ and the
‘true’ physical solution p, which are at the same order of magnitude mostly, i.e.δ∼ p. On the contrary, the numerical
noise δ of the CNS benchmark solution is much smaller than the ‘true’ physical solution  p, i.e. |δ|≪|p|, and thus
negligible, so that the CNS benchmark solution is very close to the ‘true’ physical solution p. As illustrated above in
this section, the DNS result of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence has significant deviations from the CNS
benchmark solution not only in trajectory but also in statistics of many physical variables.
    Note that the intermittent stability of turbulence in 870 < t < 970 can be successfully found by the CNS, but is
unfortunately lost by the DNS. This indicates once again that CNS should be a powerful tool to investigate turbulent
flows more accurately than DNS. Hopefully, CNS as a new method could bring us some new discoveries in turbulence.

3.4.  Scale-to-scale energy flux
    To delve into the underlying physical mechanisms, we employ the Filter-Space-Technique (FST) to extract the
scale-to-scale energy flux, denoted as Π[l] (see definition below). FST, initially developed for large eddy simulation in
the 1970s [63], involves applying a low-pass filter to the velocity field. Mathematically, this is expressed as:Z

                                                    f [l](x, t) =    G[l](x− x′) f (x′, t)dx′,                                                          (19)

where  f   =  u(x, t)  represents  a  vector  of  the  two-dimensional  velocity  field,  and  the  Gaussian  kernel  G[l](r)  =
exp(−r2/2l2) is commonly used as the filter [64,65,66]. For the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation, the scale-to-
scale energy flux can be derived analytically as:
                                                                 X       uiu j [l]− u[l]      ∂u[l]
                                               Π[l](x, t) =−                                      i
                                                                                       i  u[l]j∂x j                                                       (20)
                                                                i, j=1,2
where u1 = u, u2 = v are velocity components and x1 = x, x2 = y denote spatial coordinates. This term emerges from
filtering the nonlinear terms in Navier-Stokes equations, capturing the interaction between scales removed by the filter
and those that remain.  Crucially, the sign of Π[l] reveals the direction of energy transfer: a positive value indicates a
cascade from larger scales (> l) to smaller scales (< l), while a negative value signifies the reverse. Thus, Π[l] provides
valuable insights into both the direction and intensity of energy transfer across scales in turbulent flows.
    To quantify the energy transfer across different scales, we apply FST to the velocity field in this investigation,
extracting Π[l] for scales ranging from 0 to 2.45.  Figure17(a) depicts the averaged scale-to-scale energy flux    ⟨Π[l]⟩
as a function of the scale l for two distinct time periods:  50 ≤  t ≤  100 and 110 ≤  t ≤  250,  where the spatio-
temporal average⟨⟩ is defined by (12).  For the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence investigated in this paper,
the consistently negative values of⟨Π[l]⟩ across all scales confirm the presence of an inverse energy cascade that is a
characteristic of two-dimensional turbulence.  Notably, while the CNS curves remain unchanged between these two
time periods, a marked deviation is observed between the DNS curves, which corresponds to the emergence of the
above-mentioned qualitative difference of the flow field: when t≥ 120, the DNS result is badly polluted by numerical
noises,  as shown in Figure1and Figure2.   Furthermore,  FST reveals a significant discrepancy in       ⟨Π[l]⟩ at scales
around l≈ l f/2 (where l f  = 2π/nK  = 1.57 denotes the forcing scale) between the results obtained by the CNS and
DNS, even in the early stages (such as 50≤ t≤ 100) when the visible difference between these two cases’ velocity
fields is absent, which is particularly intriguing and of course caused by the numerical noise.
    Considering that the CNS has greatly reduced the background numerical noise so that the corresponding result can
be regarded as a ‘clean’ benchmark solution, these findings, coupled with the observed inverse energy cascade, pro-
vides rigorous evidence that the deviation caused by the numerical noise of the DNS first manifest at the smallest scales
and subsequently propagate upwards to larger scales along with the inverse energy cascade in this two-dimensional
Kolmogorov turbulence.  This amplification process eventually leads to the emergence of significant differences at
larger scales as time progresses.
    To delve deeper into the intricacies of the energy cascade loop, we turn our attention to the local balance of energy
flux at a given scale l, as described by the following equation [1]:
                                                            dlΠ[l] =ϵν(l)− Ein(l).                                                                      (21)
                                                                        18
                                            (a)                                                           (b)


Figure 17:  (a) Averaged scale-to-scale energy flux⟨Π[l]⟩ and (b) the corresponding derivative dl⟨Π[l]⟩ versus the scale l of the two-dimensional
Kolmogorov turbulence investigated in this paper, where the vertical dash line in black corresponds to the forcing scale l f  =  2π/nK  =  1.57 and
the horizontal one denotes the zero value of vertical coordinate.  These averaged results are integrated in t∈  [50, 100] (solid lines, i.e.  ‘-1’) and
t∈ [110, 250] (dash and dot lines, i.e.  ‘-2’) by means of the CNS benchmark solution (red and blue lines) and the DNS result (green and orange
lines).



In this equation, dl stands for the derivation with respect to l,ϵν(l) represents the energy dissipation density function
due to fluid viscosity, while Ein(l) denotes the energy injection density function resulting from external forces.  It is
worth noting thatϵν(l) must be greater than or equal to zero, and it approaches zero for scales significantly larger than
the Kolmogorov scale (such as its minimumηmin≈ 0.042 mentioned in § 3.5). This allows us to simplify the equation
as follows:
                                                                  Ein(l)≈−dlΠ[l].                                                                          (22)
Figure17(b) presents the measured d                     l⟨Π[l]⟩ versus the scale l in this two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence, provid-
ing insights into energy injection and extraction processes.  The results reveal that kinetic energy is injected into the
system within the scale ranges of 0.1 ≲ l ≲ 0.7 for the CNS and 0.1 ≲ l ≲ 1.0 for the DNS. However, when scales
exceed these thresholds (0.7 for the CNS and 1.0 for the DNS), kinetic energy is extracted by external forcing.  This
extraction is attributed to the alignment of the velocity field and the external force with two opposite phases at large
scale.  It is worth noting that this pattern of energy injection and extraction has also been observed in other two- and
quasi-two-dimensional systems of turbulence, which is a topic that we plan to explore in greater detail in the future.
    The inverse energy cascade has been observed in various (quasi) 2D flow systems, including Kraichnan turbulence
[67,65], bacterial turbulence [68], oceanic flows [69,70,71], and the dynamics of Jupiter’s and Saturn’s weather
layers [72].  Surprisingly, these 2D systems retain intricate dynamics despite dimensionality reduction.  Our findings
here challenge the perception of reduced complexity in lower dimensions and suggests that energy transfer pathways
can be more intricate than often assumed. For example, an external force may not always inject energy; it could pump
energy into the cascade at an intermediate scale while simultaneously extracting energy at larger scales to balance the
inverse cascade.  A similar pattern was observed in oceanic surface flows under the Coriolis force [71].  Ultimately,
the final status may depend on intricate small-scale interactions, as our results demonstrate.  A systematical study of
other two- and quasi-two-dimensional systems of turbulence will be reported in future.

3.5.  Validity of direct numerical simulation (DNS)
    Traditionally, DNS results of Navier-Stokes equations are widely regarded as ‘reliable’ benchmark solutions of
turbulence, as long as grid spacing is fine enough (i.e. less than the minimum Kolmogorov scale) [4] and time-step is
small enough, say, satisfying the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition (Courant number< 1) [5]. Is this    definitely true?



                                                                           19
                                           (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 18:  Comparisons of the probability density function (PDF) of (a) the kinetic energy E(x, y, t) and (b) the kinetic energy dissipation rate
D(x, y, t) of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence in the case of nK  = 4 and Re = 40 with the initial condition (7), given by the CNS (red
line), the DNS (black line) with ∆t = 10−4 and the DNS (blue symbol) with ∆t = 2× 10−4, respectively, where PDFs are integrated in x, y∈ [0, 2π]
and t∈ [200, 1500].



    According to our CNS result, the maximum kinetic energy dissipation rate Dmax  =  5.095 appears at t =  659.6,
corresponding to the minimum Kolmogorov scale [4], say,
                                                      ηmin≈ Re−3/4(Dmax)−1/4 = 0.042.                                                             (23)

Note that ∆x = ∆y = 2π/Nx≈ 0.0245. Thus, the famous criterion on the grid spacing [4], i.e.

                                                                 ∆x = ∆y <ηmin,                                                                          (24)
is satisfied for the CNS. It should be emphasized that, for the DNS result, the maximum kinetic energy dissipation rate
Dmax is about 4.372, corresponding to the minimum Kolmogorov scaleηmin = 0.043, so that the grid spacing criterion
(24) is also satisfied.  Therefore, the spatial resolution adopted in this paper is fine enough for       both of the CNS and
DNS of the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration.
    Besides, it is well-known that a small enough time-step is needed for DNS of Navier-Stokes equations, say, the
so-called Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition, i.e. Courant number< 1, must be satisfied [5]. For the two-dimensional
Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration, the corresponding Courant number is 0.16 for CNS and 0.016 for DNS:
both of them satisfy Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition! Therefore, the time-step used for both of DNS and CNS are
small enough, too.
    Unfortunately,  even so,  the DNS result has a huge deviation on both of small and large scales from the CNS
benchmark solution not only in trajectory and spatial symmetry but also even in statistics, as reported above.  Es-
pecially, as mentioned in §2.1, the true solution of the NS equations under consideration has the spatial symmetry
(9), but unfortunately the DNS loses this kind of spatial symmetry when     t >  120, while the CNS remains this kind
of spatial symmetry in the whole interval of time t∈ [0, 1500]:  this clearly indicates the large deviation of the DNS
results (when t >  120) from the true solution of the NS equations!  This highly suggests that even the fine enough
grid spacing satisfying the spacing criterion (24) with small enough time-step satisfying the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
condition [5] could     not guarantee the reliability and correction of DNS results:  it is only a necessary condition but
not a sufficient condition for the validity of the DNS! This also provides us a theoretical evidence that the hypothesis
⟨p +δ⟩  = ⟨p⟩ does not stand up for the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulence under consideration,  where⟨ ⟩
denotes an operator of statistics,  p +δ is the result of the NS equations given by the DNS,  p is the ‘true’ physical
solution of the NS equations, respectively.
    In addition, it is traditionally assumed that DNS results are correct and reliable if they are obtained using different
time-step and/or grid spacing but match well each other in statistics. However, it is found that the statistic results given
                                                                          20
by the DNS using different time-steps match perfectly with each other, as shown in Figure18. But unfortunately, even
such kind of perfect match still cannot guarantee the validity of the DNS results:  they all quickly lose the spatial
symmetry (9) and are quite di   fferent from those given by the CNS benchmark solution even in statistics! All of these
challenge our traditional beliefs.

4.  Concluding remarks and discussions

    Traditionally, results given by the direct numerical simulation (DNS) of Navier-Stokes equations are widely as-
sumed  as  ‘reliable’  benchmark  solutions  of  turbulence,  as  long  as  grid  spacing  is  fine  enough  (i.e.   less  than  the
minimum Kolmogorov scale) [4] and time-step is small enough, say, satisfying the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condi-
tion (Courant number< 1) [5]. Is this definitely true?
    To answer this important fundamental question, a two-dimensional sustained turbulent Kolmogorov flow driven
by an external body force is solved by means of the two numerical methods with detailed comparisons:  one is the
traditional ‘direct numerical simulation’ (DNS), the other is the ‘clean numerical simulation’ (CNS). The results given
by the DNS are a kind of mixture of the ‘false’ numerical noise and the ‘true’ solution of the NS equations, which are
mostly at the same order of magnitude, as shown in Figure1, Figure2and Figure3.  On the contrary, the numerical
noise of the result given by the CNS is much smaller than the ‘true’ solution of the NS equations in a finite but long
enough interval of time, i.e.  t∈ [0, 1500], so that the CNS result is very close to the ‘true’ solution and thus can be
used as a benchmark solution of the NS equations for comparison. It is found that numerical noise as a kind of small-
scale disturbances can lead to huge deviations in both of large and small scales on the two-dimensional Kolmogorov
turbulent flow,  not only qualitatively but also quantitatively (even in statistics),  including the spatial symmetry of
the flow field, the enstrophy spectrum as well as many statistics of physical quantities such as the velocity, vorticity,
kinetic energy, kinetic energy dissipation rate and so on, as reported in §3.1. Besides, the field geometrical structures
are also sensitive to the background numerical noise as a kind of artificial tiny disturbance, as illustrated in § 3.2.  In
addition, it should be emphasized that the so-called intermittent stability of turbulence can be successfully found by
the CNS, but is unfortunately lost by the DNS, as shown in § 3.3. It is found in § 3.4 that the averaged scale-to-scale
energy flux given by the DNS has a large deviation from that given by the CNS benchmark solution.  Furthermore,
it is illustrated in § 3.5 that a fine enough spatial grid with a small enough time-step alone cannot guarantee the
correction/reliability and validity of the DNS: it is only a necessary condition but not sufficient.  This also provides
us a theoretical evidence that the hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ does not stand up for the two-dimensional Kolmogorov
turbulent flow under consideration, where⟨⟩ denotes an operator of statistics,  p +δ is the result given by the DNS
that might be “badly polluted”, p is the ‘true’ solution of the Navier-Stokes equations, respectively. So, unfortunately,
DNS results of sustained turbulent flows, especially those having energy exchange with external systems, might have
huge deviation from the ‘true’ solution of Navier-Stokes equations.   Hopefully,  CNS as a new tool to investigate
turbulent flows more accurately than DNS could bring us some new discoveries.  Of course, more investigations for
various types of turbulent flows are needed in the future.
    It should be emphasized that all results reported above is for the case of the Reynolds number Re = 40. Similarly,
we investigated the two-dimensional Kolmogorov turbulent flow under the same initial condition (7) in ten di   fferent
Reynolds numbers Re that are randomly chosen in the domain Re∈ [35, 50], and obtained the similar results described
above. Thus, all of our conclusions mentioned above have general meanings.
    In summary, using a two-dimensional sustained turbulent Kolmogorov flow driven by an external body force as
an example, we illustrated that a DNS result of the Navier-Stokes equations is not definitely correct/reliable even in
statistics,  even if the grid spacing and time-step are small enough!  This finding might challenge some traditional
beliefs and assumptions about the NS equations and turbulence, although they are worldwide accepted nowadays.
Our finding highly suggests that one had better check very carefully DNS results of some complicated turbulent flows
governed by the Navier-Stokes equations, especially those having energy exchange with external systems.
    Certainly, a lots of investigations should be done in future. Below are some of our viewpoints for discussions.
    First of all, it should be emphasized that the CNS result has a kind of spatial symmetry (9), which comes from
the spatial symmetry of the initial condition (7) and the governing equation (1).  As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the flow
field keeps such kind of spatial symmetry (9) for CNS in the     whole interval of time t∈  [0, 1500], but for the DNS
only in a short interval of time from the beginning, i.e. t∈ [0, 120), beyond which the random numerical noises of the

                                                                       21
DNS, which have no spatial symmetry at all, have been enlarged to the same order of magnitude as the “true” solution
of the NS equations and thus finally destroy this kind of spatial symmetry (9) of the flow field.  So, the loss of the
spatial symmetry (9) of the DNS clearly indicates its large deviation from the “true” solution of the NS equations. In
mathematics this provides us a rigorous evidence that small disturbances of the NS equations might be increased to
a macroscopic level, say, at the same level of magnitude as the macroscopic physical variables under considerations.
This confirms once again the previous conclusions reported by Lin, Wang & Liao [17] and Qin & Liao [12] for a
Rayleigh-B´enard convection turbulent flow.  However, this is contrary to the general belief that small disturbances
of turbulent flow should be dissipated by the viscosity of fluid:  it is based on this general belief that NS equations
generally do not contain the unavoidable tiny noises such as thermal fluctuations, environmental disturbances, and so
on. However, if NS equations are indeed an excellent model for turbulence, then our results given by the CNS reveals
that its spatiotemporal trajectories are very sensitive to small disturbances, so that these small disturbances, no matter
they are artificial or physical, must be considered, say, should not be neglected.  Obviously, this leads to a logical
paradox! Therefore, it should be wrong in physics for NS equations to neglect unavoidable small disturbances!
    Note that nearly all DNS results of NS equations quickly become badly polluted.  This is obvious from the well-
known fact that,  even for exactly the same NS equations with the same boundary/initial conditions and the same
physical  parameters,  all  DNS  results  quickly  become  quite  different  in  spatiotemporal  trajectories,  although  their
animations of flow field look quite similar.  Here, the obvious difference of spatiotemporal trajectories implies the
‘badly’  polluted,  denoted  by  p + δ.   However,  if  the  statistics  of  the  corresponding  turbulent  flows  are  stable  in
statistics, say, the hypothesis⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩ holds, then the badly polluted DNS results p +δ agree well with the true
solution in statistics! This is the reason why many DNS results agree well with the experiments: the key point is the
statistical stability, which is more important than the accuracy of numerical simulations of DNS.
    Secondly, how can we know in general cases whether a DNS result of turbulent flow governed by the NS equations
is correct/reliable in statistics or not? Although the two-dimensional sustained turbulent Kolmogorov flow considered
in this paper is just a simple example, it highly suggests that the statistics stability, say,⟨p +δ⟩ =⟨p⟩, should be very
important for turbulent flows. This is exactly the reason why Liao [16] proposed the so-called ‘     modified fourth Clay
millennium problem’:
       “The existence, smoothness and statistic stability of the Navier-Stokes equation:  Can we prove the existence
       and smoothness of the solution of the Navier-Stokes equation with physically proper boundary and initial con-
       ditions, whose statistics are stable (or unstable), i.e., insensitive (or sensitive) to small disturbances? ”
Note that the statistic stability is emphasized here, since unavoidable physical disturbances (such as thermal fluctu-
ations) always exist in practice.  Statistic stability of turbulent flows is also the first problem of “Eight Key Open
Questions in Ocean Engineering” [73] issued in 2023 by State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, China. The key
point is to find out the necessary and sufficient condition of such kind of statistic stability. From practical view-point
of CFD, statistic stability of NS equations is more important than the existence and smoothness of its solution.
    Thirdly, it should be emphasized that, from physical point of view, the NS equations (as a model of turbulence)
neglect the influence of the unavoidable small physical disturbances such as thermal fluctuations and environmental
noises.  Note that physical thermal fluctuation is often larger than the artificial numerical noise of the DNS. Thus,
if artificial numerical noises could be regarded as physical thermal fluctuations (see Eckmann and Ruelle [74]), our
results imply that small but unavoidable physical disturbances sometimes might have huge influences on the long-
term  statistics  of  turbulent  flow  and  thus  should  not  be  neglected  in  physics.   Therefore,  from  physical  point  of
view, it should be better to use the Landau-Lifshitz-Navier-Stokes (LLNS) equations [75,76], which consider the
influence of unavoidable thermal fluctuations, instead of the NS equations, to model turbulent flows. So, although the
NS equations might be physically wrong since small unavoidable physical disturbances are not considered, artificial
numerical noises in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) practically play a role like physical thermal fluctuations
[74],  which might “correct” ,  more or less,  this kind of       physical mistakes of the NS equations.   Therefore,  from
physical viewpoint, artificial numerical noises might have positive meanings for the NS equations, although they have
no mathematical meanings at all.  It should be emphasized that the NS equations are only a mathematical model of
turbulent flows in physics: they are quite different things. Possibly, the unavoidable but nasty numerical noises might
be very important in correctly modelling turbulence. It is a pity that the statistic stability and the influences of artificial
numerical noises on modeling turbulence have been neglected.


                                                                        22
    Finally, let us point out the differences and relationships between the CNS and DNS. First of all, CNS contains an
important concept, namely the “critical predictable time” Tc, within which numerical noise of numerical simulation
(given by CNS) is much smaller than its true solution and thus is reliable (i.e. “clean”) and can be used as a benchmark
solution.  Secondly, the reliability of result in t∈ [0, Tc] given by CNS with a numerical noise s1 can be verified by
another result given by CNS with a smaller numerical noise  s2 <  s1.  However, different from the CNS, DNS has
not  the  concept  “critical  predictable  time”  Tc  at  all,  since  it  is  a  traditional  belief  that  small  disturbances  of  NS
equations should not enlarge to a macroscopic level.  In other words, Tc of DNS is assumed to be infinite from the
viewpoint of CNS. Unfortunately, our results reported in this paper indicate that this assumption is wrong!  This is a
fundamental difference between CNS and DNS. On the other side, the traditional DNS that uses data in the double
precision and the 4th-order Runge-Kutta method in temporal dimension can be regarded as a special case of the CNS
that adopts the multiple-precision and high-order Taylor expansion in temporal dimension.  Note that the DNS result
reported in this paper loses the spatial symmetry (9) and thus deviates largely from its true solution when     t >  120,
mainly because its “critical predictable time” Tc is only about 120, say, Tc≈ 120, which is too short for calculating
statistics. However, unlike DNS, the CNS can greatly enlarge the so-called “critical predictable time” Tc by reducing
the numerical noises. For example, the “critical predictable time” Tc of the CNS result reported in this paper is greater
than 1500, say, Tc > 1500, by means of the multiple precision with 200 significant digits for all physical/numerical
variables and parameters and the 60th-order Taylor expansion with the time-step ∆t = 10−3. In this way, one can gain
a ‘clean’, reliable, benchmark solution of NS equations by means of the CNS. Shortly speaking, DNS can be regarded
as a special case of the CNS: the CNS has much less numerical noises and thus much larger “critical predictable time”
Tc than the DNS. In other words, CNS is more general than DNS. Indeed, for the very first time, CNS provides us a
way to rigorously verify DNS results: any a CNS result with a “critical predictable time” Tc can be verified by another
CNS result with even smaller numerical noises.  Without doubt, CNS as a more general and more precise tool than
DNS can provide us a totally new way to investigate turbulent flows.


Funding

    This work is partly supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12302288; 12272230)
and State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering.


Declaration of Interests

    The authors report no conflict of interest.


Data availability statement

    The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author.


Author ORCID

    Shijie QIN, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0809-1766; Yongxiang HUANG, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2011-9215;
Shijun LIAO, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2372-9502


Author contributions

    Qin performed the analysis and wrote the draft. Yang performed the analysis. Mei and Wang analysed the results
especially related to the field geometrical structures.  Huang analysed the results, especially related to the scale-to-
scale energy flux and the energy injection/extraction processes.  Liao conceived/designed the analysis, and wrote the
manuscript.




                                                                      23
Appendix  A.  The CNS algorithm for two-dimensional Kolmogorov flow

     In 2020,  in order to overcome the huge computation requirements of the CNS algorithm in spectral space,  an
efficient CNS algorithm [17,18,19] was proposed in physical space for spatio-temporal chaos.  Recently, Qin and
Liao [12] have successfully applied the CNS algorithm in physical space to a two-dimensional turbulent Rayleigh-
B´enard convection.   Here,  the basic idea of this kind of efficient CNS algorithm is briefly described by using the
two-dimensional Kolmogorov flow as an example.
     We rewrite the governing equation (1), which is based on Navier-Stokes equations, as following:
                                           ∂
                                          ∂t (ψxx +ψyy) =ψy(ψxxx +ψxyy)−ψx(ψxxy +ψyyy)
                                                  +  1Re(ψxxxx + 2ψxxyy +ψyyyy)− nK cos(nKy),                                                 (A.1)

where x and y as subscripts denote the spatial derivatives corresponding to horizontal and vertical directions, respec-
tively.
     The computational domain x, y∈ [0, 2π] is discretized by means of Nx× Ny equidistant, i.e.

                                                            x j =  2π jNx ,            yk =  2πkNy ,                                                               (A.2)

where  j = 0, 1, 2, ..., Nx− 1 and k = 0, 1, 2, ..., Ny− 1.
     To reduce truncation errors in the dimension of time, the high-order Taylor expansions are adopted, i.e.

                                                                             MX
                                                   ψ(x j, yk, t + ∆t)≈           ψ[m](x j, yk, t)(∆t)m,                                                    (A.3)
                                                                            m=0
where ∆t is the time-step, M is the order of Taylor expansion, with the definition
                                                        ψ[m](x j, yk, t) =   1    ∂mψ(x j, yk, t)
                                                                              m!         ∂tm   .                                                           (A.4)
Here, the order M should be large enough so as to reduce the truncation errors to a required tiny level.
     Differentiating (m− 1) times both sides of (A.1) with respect to        t and then dividing them by m!, we obtain the
governing equation ofψ[m]:
                                   ψ[m]                                         nFm +  1     2ψ[m−1]
                                     xx (x j, yk, t) +ψ[m]yy  (x j, yk, t) =  1m         Re       xxyy  (x j, yk, t)
                                                                     +ψ[m−1]xxxx  (x j, yk, t) +ψ[m−1]yyyy  (x j, yk, t)
                                            m−1X
                                         +       ψ[r]y  (x j, yk, t)ψ[m−1−r]xxx      (x j, yk, t) +ψ[m−1−r]xyy      (x j, yk, t)
                                            r=0
                                          m−1X
                                       −       ψ[r]x  (x j, yk, t)ψ[m−1−r]xxy      (x j, yk, t) +ψ[m−1−r]yyy      (x j, yk, t)o,                                         (A.5)
                                          r=0
where m≥ 1 and                                             ( −nK cos(nKyk),            m = 1
                                                   Fm =        0,                                   m> 1.                                                       (A.6)

     Note that there exist some spatial partial derivatives denoted by subscripts in (A.5), such as   ∂s1+s2ψ[r]/(∂xs1∂ys2)
with r,  s1,  s2≥  0.  In order to approximate these spatial partial derivative terms with high computational efficiency
and precision from the known discrete variableψ[r](x j, yk, t), we adopt the spatial Fourier series

                                                       ⌊Nx/3⌋X      ⌊Ny/3⌋X
                                  ψ[r](x, y, t)≈                              Ψ[r](nx, ny, t) exp(i nxx) exp(i nyy),                                (A.7)
                                                     nx=−⌊Nx/3⌋  ny=−⌊Ny/3⌋
                                                                             24
where nx, ny are integers,⌊⌋ stands for a floor function, i =√−1 represents the imaginary unit, for dealiasing Ψ[r] = 0
is imposed for wavenumbers outside the above domain P, and

                                                                  Nx−1X Ny−1X
                                  Ψ[r](nx, ny, t) =     1Nx Ny                ψ[r](x j, yk, t) exp(−i nxx j) exp(−i nyyk),                              (A.8)
                                                                   j=0   k=0

is determined by the knownψ[r](x j, yk, t). Then, we can obtain the rather accurate approximations of the spatial partial
derivative terms in (A.5), say,

                                      ∂s1+s2ψ[r]
                                      ∂xs1∂ys2  (x j, yk, t)
                                                ⌊Nx/3⌋X      ⌊Ny/3⌋X
                                ≈    is1+s2                            (nx)s1(ny)s2 Ψ[r](nx, ny, t) exp(i nxx j) exp(i nyyk).                       (A.9)
                                              nx=−⌊Nx/3⌋   ny=−⌊Ny/3⌋

Here, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm is used to increase computational efficiency. In this way, the spatial
truncation error can be decreased to a required tiny level, as long as the mode numbers Nx and Ny are large enough.
     Note that, if the order M of the Taylor expansion (A.3) is large enough, temporal truncation errors can be reduced
to a required tiny level.  Besides, if the spatial discretization is fine enough, say, the mode numbers Nx  and Ny  are
large enough, spatial truncation errors in Fourier expression (A.7) and the corresponding spatial derivative terms in
(A.5) can be decreased to a required tiny level.  However, this is not enough, since there always exist some round-
off errors that might be larger than temporal or spatial truncation errors.  Therefore, all physical/numerical variables
and parameters are expressed in multiple precision (MP) with a large enough number Ns of significant digits, so that
the round-off errors can also be reduced to a required tiny level.  In this way, the background numerical noise, i.e.
truncation errors and round-off errors as a whole, can be reduced to a required tiny level. This is different from most
of the other numerical algorithms, including the general DNS which has double precision at best.  In addition, note
that the results given by the CNS are useful only in a limited (but long enough) interval of time t∈ [0, Tc], in which
the numerical noise can be negligible.

References

 [1]U. Frisch, Turbulence: The Legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
 [2]S. Peter, Explaining Chaos, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
 [3]T. Bohr, M. H. Jensen, G. Paladin, A. Vulpiani, Dynamical Systems Approach to Turbulence, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
 [4]S. B. Pope, Turbulent Flows, IOP Publishing, 2001.
 [5]R. Courant,  K. Friedrichs,  H. Lewy,       ¨Uber die partiellen differenzengleichungen der mathematischen physik,  Math. Ann. 100 (1) (1928)
      32–74. doi:10.1007/BF01448839.
 [6]E. N. Lorenz, Deterministic nonperiodic flow, J. Atmos. Sci. 20 (2) (1963) 130–141.
 [7]G. Chen, X. Dong, From Chaos To Order, Co. World Scientific Pub. Co., Singapore, 2014.
 [8]C. E. Leith, R. H. Kraichnan, Predictability of turbulent flows, J. Atmos. Sci. 29 (6) (1972) 1041–1058.
 [9]G. Bo    ffetta, S. Musacchio, Predictability of the inverse energy cascade in 2D turbulence, Phys. Fluids 13 (4) (2001) 1060–1062.
[10]G. Bo      ffetta, S. Musacchio, Chaos and predictability of homogeneous-isotropic turbulence, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (5) (2017) 054102.
[11]Y. C. Li, R. D. J. G. Ho, A. Berera, Z. C. Feng, Superfast amplification and superfast nonlinear saturation of perturbations as a mechanism of
      turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 904 (2020) A27.
[12]S. Qin, S. Liao, Large-scale influence of numerical noises as artificial stochastic disturbances on a sustained turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 948
      (2022) A7.
[13]N. Platt, L. Sirovich, N. Fitzmaurice, An investigation of chaotic Kolmogorov flows, Phys. Fluids A 3 (4) (1991) 681–696.
[14]F. Feudel, N. Seehafer, Bifurcations and pattern formation in a two-dimensional Navier-Stokes fluid, Phys. Rev. E 52 (4) (1995) 3506.
[15]S. Liao, On the reliability of computed chaotic solutions of non-linear di      fferential equations, Tellus Ser. A-Dyn. Meteorol. Oceanol. 61 (4)
      (2009) 550–564.
[16]S. Liao, Clean Numerical Simulation, Chapman and Hall      /CRC, Boca Raton, 2023.
[17]Z. Lin, L. Wang, S. Liao, On the origin of intrinsic randomness of Rayleigh-B       ´enard turbulence, Sci. China-Phys. Mech. Astron. 60 (1) (2017)
      1–13.
[18]T. Hu, S. Liao, On the risks of using double precision in numerical simulations of spatio-temporal chaos, J. Comput. Phys. 418 (2020) 109629.
[19]S. Qin, S. Liao, Influence of numerical noises on computer-generated simulation of spatio-temporal chaos, Chaos Solitons Fractals 136 (2020)
      109790.
[20]J. C. Sprott, Elegant Chaos: Algebraically Simple Chaotic Flows, World Scientific, Singapore, 2010.
                                                                                 25
[21]W.-K. Lee, A. G. L. Borthwick, P. H. Taylor, Wind-induced chaotic mixing in a two-layer density-stratified shallow flow, J. Hydraul. Res.
       52 (2) (2014) 219–227.
[22]S. Gao, L. Tao, X. Tian, J. Yang, Flow around an inclined circular disk, J. Fluid Mech. 851 (2018) 687–714.
[23]S. Liao, On the numerical simulation of propagation of micro-level inherent uncertainty for chaotic dynamic systems, Chaos Solitons Fractals
       47 (2013) 1–12.
[24]S. Liao, Physical limit of prediction for chaotic motion of three-body problem, Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 19 (3) (2014) 601–
       616.
[25]P. Oyanarte, MP-a multiple precision package, Comput. Phys. Commun. 59 (2) (1990) 345–358.
[26]S. Liao, P. Wang, On the mathematically reliable long-term simulation of chaotic solutions of lorenz equation in the interval [0, 10000], Sci.
       China-Phys. Mech. Astron. 57 (2) (2014) 330–335.
[27]S. Liao, X. Li, On the inherent self-excited macroscopic randomness of chaotic three-body systems, Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 25 (09) (2015)
       1530023.
[28]X. Li, S. Liao, More than six hundred new families of Newtonian periodic planar collisionless three-body orbits, Sci. China-Phys. Mech.
       Astron. 60 (12) (2017) 129511.
[29]X. Li, Y. Jing, S. Liao, Over a thousand new periodic orbits of a planar three-body system with unequal masses, Publ. Astron. Soc. Jpn. 70 (4)
       (2018) 64.
[30]S. Liao, X. Li, Y. Yang, Three-body problem – from Newton to supercomputer plus machine learning, New Astronomy 96 (2022) 101850,
       (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newast.2022.101850).
[31]S. Liao, S. Qin, Ultra-chaos: an insurmountable objective obstacle of reproducibility and replication, Adv. Appl. Math. Mech. 14 (4) (2022)
       799–815.
[32]S. Qin, S. Liao, A self-adaptive algorithm of the clean numerical simulation (CNS) for chaos, Adv. Appl. Math. Mech. 15 (5) (2023) 1191–
       1215.
[33]T. Xu, J. Li, Z. Li, S. Liao, Accurate predictions of chaotic motion of a free fall disk, Phys. Fluids 33 (3) (2021) 037111.
[34]S. Qin, S. Liao, A kind of Lagrangian chaotic property of the Arnold-Beltrami-Childress flow, J. Fluid Mech. 960 (2023) A15.
[35]Y. Yang, S. Qin, S. Liao, Ultra-chaos of a mobile robot: A higher disorder than normal-chaos, Chaos Solitons Fractals 167 (2023) 113037.
[36]B. Zhang, S. Liao, Ultra-chaos in a meandering jet flow, Physica D 455 (2023) 133886.
[37]V. I. Arnold, L. D. Meshalkin, Seminar led by A.N. Kolmogorov on selected problems of analysis (1958-1959), Usp. Mat. Nauk 15 (247)
       (1960) 20–24.
[38]L. D. Meshalkin, Y. G. Sinai, Investigation of the stability of a stationary solution of a system of equations for the plane movement of an
       incompressible viscous liquid, J. Appl. Math. Mech. 25 (6) (1961) 1700–1705.
[39]D. N. Beaumont, The stability of spatially periodic flows, J. Fluid Mech. 108 (1981) 461–474.
[40]A. Thess, Instabilities in two-dimensional spatially periodic flows. Part I: Kolmogorov flow, Phys. Fluids A 4 (7) (1992) 1385–1395.
[41]N. J. Balmforth, Y.-N. Young, Stratified Kolmogorov flow, J. Fluid Mech. 450 (2002) 131–167.
[42]C. Marchioro, An example of absence of turbulence for any Reynolds number, Commun. Math. Phys. 105 (1) (1986) 99–106.
[43]J. S. A. Green, Two-dimensional turbulence near the viscous limit, J. Fluid Mech. 62 (2) (1974) 273–287.
[44]G. I. Sivashinsky, Weak turbulence in periodic flows, Physica D 17 (2) (1985) 243–255.
[45]G. J. Chandler, R. R. Kerswell, Invariant recurrent solutions embedded in a turbulent two-dimensional Kolmogorov flow, J. Fluid Mech. 722
       (2013) 554–595.
[46]N. F. Bondarenko, M. Z. Gak, F. V. Dolzhanskii, Laboratory and theoretical models of plane periodic flow, Akad. Nauk SSSR 15 (1979)
       1017–1026.
[47]A. M. Obukhov, Kolmogorov flow and laboratory simulation of it, Russian Math. Surveys 38 (4) (1983) 113–126.
[48]J. Sommeria, Experimental study of the two-dimensional inverse energy cascade in a square box, J. Fluid Mech. 170 (1986) 139–168.
[49]J. M. Burgess, C. Bizon, W. D. McCormick, J. B. Swift, H. L. Swinney, Instability of the Kolmogorov flow in a soap film, Phys. Rev. E 60 (1)
       (1999) 715.
[50]E. N. Lorenz, Barotropic instability of Rossby wave motion, J. Atmos. Sci. 29 (2) (1972) 258–265.
[51]E. Kazantsev, Unstable periodic orbits and attractor of the barotropic ocean model, Nonlinear Process. Geophys. 5 (4) (1998) 193–208.
[52]A. J. Manfroi, W. R. Young, Slow evolution of zonal jets on the beta plane, J. Atmos. Sci. 56 (5) (1999) 784–800.
[53]Y.-K. Tsang, W. R. Young, Energy-enstrophy stability of   β-plane Kolmogorov flow with drag, Phys. Fluids 20 (8) (2008).
[54]Y.-K. Tsang, W. R. Young, Forced-dissipative two-dimensional turbulence: A scaling regime controlled by drag, Phys. Rev. E 79 (4) (2009)
       045308.
[55]N. J. Balmforth, Y.-N. Young, Stratified Kolmogorov flow. Part 2, J. Fluid Mech. 528 (2005) 23–42.
[56]L. Wang, N. Peters, The length-scale distribution function of the distance between extremal points in passive scalar turbulence, J. Fluid Mech.
       554 (2006) 457–475.
[57]L. Wang, N. Peters, Length-scale distribution functions and conditional means for various fields in turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 608 (2008)
       113–138.
[58]L. Wang, N. Peters, A new view of flow topology and conditional statistics in turbulence, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A-Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.
       371 (1982) (2013) 20120169.
[59]D. Denker, A. Attili, J. Boschung, F. Hennig, M. Gauding, M. Bode, H. Pitsch, Dissipation element analysis of non-premixed jet flames, J.
       Fluid Mech. 905 (2020) A4.
[60]F. D. Costa, O. C. Acevedo, J. C. Mombach, G. A. Degrazia, A simplified model for intermittent turbulence in the nocturnal boundary layer,
       J. Atmos. Sci. 68 (8) (2011) 1714–1729.
[61]G. Gogia, J. C. Burton, Emergent bistability and switching in a nonequilibrium crystal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (17) (2017) 178004.
[62]G. Gogia, W. Yu, J. C. Burton, Intermittent turbulence in a many-body system, Phys. Rev. Res. 2 (2) (2020) 023250.
[63]A. Leonard, Energy cascade in large-eddy simulations of turbulent fluid flows, Adv. Geophys. 18 (1975) 237–248.
[64]S. Chen, R. E. Ecke, G. L. Eyink, X. Wang, Z. Xiao, Physical mechanism of the two-dimensional enstrophy cascade, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (21)

                                                                                        26
      (2003) 214501.
[65]G.    Bo      ffetta,     R.    Ecke,     Two-dimensional    turbulence,     Annu.    Rev.    Fluid    Mech.    44    (2012)    427–51.          doi:10.1146/
      annurev-fluid-120710-101240.
[66]Q. Zhou, Y. Huang, Z. Lu, Y. Liu, R. Ni, Scale-to-scale energy and enstrophy transport in two-dimensional Rayleigh-Taylor turbulence, J.
      Fluid Mech. 786 (2016) 294–308.
[67]R. Kraichnan, Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence, Physics of Fluids 10 (1967) 1417–1423.        doi:10.1063/1.1762301.
[68]L. Wang, Y. Huang, Intrinsic flow structure and multifractality in two-dimensional bacterial turbulence, Physical Review E 95 (2017) 052215.
      doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.95.052215.
[69]G. K. Vallis, Atmospheric and oceanic fluid dynamics, Cambridge University Press, 2017.        doi:10.1017/9781107588417.
[70]S. Lovejoy,  Weather,  Macroweather,  and the Climate:  Our Random Yet Predictable Atmosphere,  Oxford University Press,  2019.         doi:
      10.1093/oso/9780190864217.001.0001.
[71]D. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Peng, J. Hu, F. G. Schmitt, Y. Huang, Scale-to-scale energy flux in the oceanic global circulation models,
      Frontiers in Marine Science(accepted) (2024).
[72]P. L. Read, The dynamics of Jupiter’s and Saturn’s weather layers: a synthesis after Cassini and Juno, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 56
      (2024) 271–93.
[73]State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, Eight key open questions in ocean engineering, Journal of Ocean Engineering and Science 8 (6)
      (2023) iv – vi. doi:10.1016/S2468-0133(23)00084-0.
[74]J. P. Eckmann, D. Ruelle, Ergodic theory of chaos and strange attractors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57 (1985) 617.
[75]L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, Course of Theoretical Physics: Fluid Mechanics (Vol. 6), Addision-Wesley, Reading, 1959.
[76]D. Bandak, N. Goldenfeld, Dissipation-range fluid turbulence and thermal noise, Physical Review E 105 (2022) 065113.











































                                                                                       27