                   Deep learning lattice gauge theories



             Anuj Apte,a Anthony Ashmore,b,c Clay C´ordova,a and Tzu-Chen Huanga




                     aEnrico Fermi Institute & Kadanoff Center for Theoretical Physics,

                                University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

                           bLaboratoire de Physique Th´eorique et Hautes  ´Energies,

                  Sorbonne Universit´e, UPMC Paris 06, UMR 7589, 75005 Paris, France

                                   cDepartment of Physics, Skidmore College,

                                       Saratoga Springs, NY 12866, USA




                                                     Abstract

     Monte Carlo methods have led to profound insights into the strong-coupling behaviour
     of lattice gauge theories and produced remarkable results such as first-principles com-
     putations of hadron masses.  Despite tremendous progress over the last four decades,
     fundamental challenges such as the sign problem and the inability to simulate real-time
     dynamics remain.  Neural network quantum states have emerged as an alternative method
     that seeks to overcome these challenges.  In this work, we use gauge-invariant neural
     network quantum states to accurately compute the ground state of ZN  lattice gauge
     theories in 2 + 1 dimensions.  Using transfer learning, we study the distinct topological
     phases and the confinement phase transition of these theories.  For Z2, we identify a
     continuous transition and compute critical exponents, finding excellent agreement with
     existing numerics for the expected Ising universality class.  In the Z3 case, we observe
     a weakly first-order transition and identify the critical coupling.  Our findings suggest
     that neural network quantum states are a promising method for precise studies of lattice
     gauge theory.




apteanuj@uchicago.edu,  aashmore@skidmore.edu,  clayc@uchicago.edu,  tzuchen@uchicago.edu
Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                                             2

2   ZN  lattice gauge theory                                                                                 8
     2.1    Wilson loop operators   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10
     2.2    Creutz ratio  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
     2.3   ‘t Hooft operators .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
     2.4    Global symmetry and dual spin models    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
     2.5    Ground-state degeneracy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14
     2.6    Potential energy between charges  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15

3   Phases and phase transitions in ZN  theories                                             17
     3.1    First-order vs continuous phase transitions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17
     3.2    Confined and deconfined phases .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  18
     3.3    Confinement transition .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19

4   Neural network quantum states                                                                    20
     4.1    L-CNNs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  23
     4.2    NetKet implementation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26
     4.3    Hilbert space sector of the NNQS .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  30

5   Z2 gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions                                                       31
     5.1    Ground-state energies   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32
     5.2    Searching for the critical point and phase structure  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32
     5.3    Critical exponents and finite-size scaling  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  36
     5.4    Potential energy between charges  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  41

6   Z3 gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions                                                       41
     6.1    Ground-state energies   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  42
     6.2    First-order phase transition   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  42
     6.3    Static charges  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  47

A  Implementation of Wilson loop operators                                                  48

B  Exponents from data collapse                                                                    49

C  BST extrapolation                                                                                       51





                                                                                1
1    Introduction

Since their introduction by Wilson [1,2], lattice gauge theories have been pivotal in understanding
fundamental physics, particularly quantum chromodynamics (QCD) [3,4], which governs the strong
nuclear force.  QCD, a non-Abelian gauge theory, describes interactions between quarks and gluons,
the  elementary  constituents  of  hadrons.   Despite  its  apparent  simplicity,  the  non-perturbative
regime  of  this  theory  exhibits  remarkably  complex  phenomena,  including  confinement  [5]  and
chiral  symmetry  breaking  [6,7],  often  resisting  analytical  tools.   As  such,  Monte  Carlo-based
numerical methods have become invaluable [8], providing insights into QCD phases [9] and enabling
first-principles calculations of hadron masses [10].
    Discrete  lattice  gauge  theories  –  lattice  gauge  theories  with  finite  gauge  groups  –  serve  as
important models for studying the non-perturbative behaviour and emergent phenomena of gauge
theories.  While simpler than their continuous counterparts, they still capture key features such
as gauge invariance, confinement and topological excitations.  This makes them valuable testing
grounds for developing and benchmarking new theoretical and computational techniques.
    The present work focuses on finding the ground-state wavefunction of discrete lattice gauge
theories in 2 + 1 dimensions.  Since the wavefunction contains rich information about quantum
correlations and topological properties of the system, there are many reasons to directly compute
the wavefunction itself instead of simply calculating expectation values of observables via traditional
(Euclidean) Monte Carlo.  For example, entanglement measures such as R´enyi entropies can be
computed with this approach, since the wavefunction encodes the full correlation structure of the
lattice system [11,12].
    Obtaining accurate ground-state wavefunctions for lattice gauge theories is challenging due to
the complexity of the non-perturbative regime and the exponential growth of the Hilbert space with
system size.  In particular, traditional analytical and numerical methods often struggle to capture
the intricate correlations and entanglement present in the ground state of these systems.  Recent
years have shown that deep neural networks are adept at learning and sampling from classical
probability distributions across a variety of domains, including text, images and speech [13].  The
problem of finding a ground-state wavefunction can be viewed as a generalization of this problem,
namely, computing the complex-valued probability amplitude associated to the basis elements of the
underlying Hilbert space, so it is not surprising that neural networks are well suited to this task.
    The use of neural networks to represent wavefunctions was pioneered by Carleo and Troyer [14],
and has since become known as a “neural network quantum state” (NQS or NNQS). The idea
behind a neural network quantum state is to model the wavefunction as a deep neural network
with hidden layers, leveraging the expressive power of these networks to construct a highly flexible
variational ansatz for the ground state.  One then “trains” the network to minimise the energy of
the variational state, with expectation values calculated using Markov chain Monte Carlo.  Key


                                                            2
to this process is the ability to efficiently compute gradients of expectation values with respect
to the parameters of the network, so that the energy can be minimised via (stochastic) gradient
descent [15].  Thanks to differentiable programming and backpropagation [16,17], one can compute
these gradients to machine precision without resorting to numerical interpolation.  At the end of the
training process, one hopes to have a NNQS that can accurately capture the physics of the ground
state and enable calculation of other observables.
    There are two fundamental problems in simulating quantum many-body systems:  the problems
of  representation  and  computation.   Focusing  on  a  discrete  lattice  system  for  concreteness,  a
wavefunction associates a complex number to every lattice configuration.  Since the number of
configurations grows exponentially with the system size, naively one might need an ansatz with a
similarly large number of parameters.  This is the problem of representation.  There is no reason
to expect that a randomly chosen state of the full Hilbert space can be represented efficiently, but
fortunately physical states – and ground states in particular – are not generic, instead exhibiting
features such as area-law entanglement [18].  NNQSs provide an efficient and flexible parametrisation
of these states with a sub-exponential number of variational parameters.1  Given such an efficient
encoding of a quantum state, one still needs to be able to compute probability amplitudes in a
reasonable time.  Furthermore, physical observables are still operators on an exponentially large
Hilbert space, so computing expectation values may be challenging.  These comprise the problem
of computation.  For NNQSs, it is simple and fast to compute the amplitude for an input lattice
configuration, with observables then calculated by restricting to a finite sum over Hilbert space via
Monte Carlo importance sampling [23].
    Much like traditional lattice Monte Carlo,  NNQSs can be used to study finite-temperature
systems  [24].   There  are  also  a  number  of  questions  that  are  difficult  to  tackle  with  Euclidean
methods  but  which  are  within  reach  of  NNQSs,  including  real-time  and  dissipative  dynamics,
fermionic systems with finite chemical potential, quantum-state reconstruction, and open quantum
systems [25].  It is possible to impose both global and gauge symmetries exactly in NNQS by using
invariant neural networks [26].
    The particular neural network architecture that we employ is based on “lattice gauge-equivariant
convolutional neural networks” (L-CNNs), introduced by Favoni et al. [27].  L-CNNs possess the
usual locality and weight sharing properties of traditional convolutional networks.  Crucially, they are
also manifestly gauge equivariant and so one does not have to impose gauge symmetry via inexact

   1NNQSs should also be compared with tensor networks for 1 + 1-dimensional systems.  Tensor networks are known
to be complete (any pure state can be described by increasing the bond dimension sufficiently) and efficient for
states with area-law entanglement (the cost of computing expectation values grows polynomially with the number of
parameters).  Similarly, thanks to universal representation theorems [19], NNQSs can describe arbitrary quantum
states, including ground states with volume-law entanglement [20].  Although there is no bound on the size of the
network required to encode these states, it is known that NNQSs can exactly reproduce tensor network or projected
entangled pair states, and there are examples where NNQSs provide efficient representations of physically relevant
states where these other approaches fail to be efficient [21,22].


                                                               3
methods, such as energy penalties.  Their uses to date have focused on predicting gauge-invariant
observables via supervised learning [28 –33].  We instead use an L-CNN as a NNQS, i.e. a variational
ansatz for the ground-state wavefunction, similar to the approach taken by Luo et al. [34,35].  We
have implemented this architecture using NetKet [36], a flexible machine-learning framework for
many-body quantum physics built on top of JAX [37], enabling automatic differentiation and GPU
acceleration.

Previous work

Machine  learning  methods  have  already  made  an  impact  in  many  areas  of  physics,  including
astronomy  and  cosmology,  condensed-matter  physics,  fluid  dynamics,  quantum  chemistry,  and
nuclear and particle physics, and have shown potential for studying lattice gauge theories [38].
    Since our approach is based on an existing network architecture, it is useful to outline how
our work adds to the state of the art.  Favoni et al. [27] introduced L-CNNs to incorporate gauge
symmetries directly into the network structure while maintaining the ability to approximate any
gauge-covariant function on the lattice.  The authors showed that L-CNNs outperform conventional
CNNs in regression tasks involving Wilson loops of different sizes and shapes in pure SU(2) gauge
theory,  with  the  performance  gap  increasing  as  the  loop  size  grows.   This  supervised  learning
problem demonstrated that L-CNNs can learn the physical information encoded in Wilson loops
and other gauge-invariant observables.  There have been a number of follow-up works which explore
the generalization ability of L-CNNs and their geometric interpretation [31,39], but no attempt has
been made to use this architecture as a variational ansatz for the ground state of a lattice theory.
    Closer to our approach is the work by Luo et al. [34], where gauge-equivariant neural network
quantum states were introduced as a technique to efficiently model the wavefunction of lattice gauge
theories while maintaining exact local gauge invariance.  For the specific case of Z2 gauge theory on
a square lattice, the authors combined this architecture with variational Monte Carlo to study the
ground state and the confinement-deconfinement transition.  This was extended to include matter
in [40] and to      U(1) gauge theory in [35].  The aims of the present paper include greatly improving
upon the precision of these results and studying Z3 gauge theory.  For example, these studies did
not determine the order of the phase transition, calculate the critical exponents, investigate static
charges, or provide a precise value for the critical coupling.  In filling these gaps, our goal is to
demonstrate that deep learning can be used for precise calculation, and in doing so enhance our
understanding of the phases and phase transitions in discrete gauge theories.


Main results

For Z2 lattice gauge theory, we compute the ground-state energy as a function of coupling for various
lattice sizes (Figure8) and confirm the existence of confined and deconfined phases via calculations


                                                             4
of order and disorder parameters and the string tension.  We show that the confinement phase
transition between the two phases is continuous, with a critical coupling and critical exponents
given by
                             gc = 0.7546(8),   β = 0.326(4),   ν = 0.630(3).                              (1.1)

These values are calculated via “curve collapse” from finite-scaling theory.  The high quality of the
resulting collapse can be seen in Figure13.  These values imply that the conformal dimensions of
the σ and ϵ primary operators in the 2 + 1-d Ising CFT are:

                                        ∆σ = 0.518(4),        ∆ϵ = 1.412(8),                                           (1.2)

in excellent agreement with previous results from perturbative calculations, Monte Carlo simulations
and the conformal bootstrap.  We further refine our estimate of the critical coupling using BST
extrapolation [41 –43] and find  gc = 0.756431.  We also confirm the linear potential between static
charges and compute it as a function of coupling, finding it vanishes for small couplings and smoothly
increases around the critical coupling, approaching the strong-coupling prediction for large couplings.
    For Z3, we compute the ground-state energies for varying lattice size (Figure16) and, for small
lattices, confirm that they agree with results from exact diagonalization.  As with Z2, we show the
existence of confined and deconfined phases via Wilson loop and ‘t Hooft string operators, and
the string tension.  We investigate the nature of the phase transition by examining the electric
and magnetic energies, and derivatives of the energy as a function of coupling.  We plot these in
Figure19, finding that            Z3 displays a sharp change at the transition compared with a smooth change
for Z2, indicating the presence of a first-order transition.  This transition occurs within the range
g∈ [0.775, 0.7875], giving a critical coupling of

                                                     gc = 0.781(6).                                                            (1.3)

Due to finite system size and the weakly first-order nature of the transition, we do not observe a
discontinuity in either the energy derivatives or the order and disorder parameters.
    We also quantify how well our networks have learned the charge conjugation symmetry of the Z3
theory by measuring the imaginary component of Wilson loop expectations, which should vanish for
the exact ground state.  Depending on the value of the coupling, we find that this holds to better
than one part in 104 to 106.  Finally, we compute the static potential between charges, recovering
the expected linear potential and finding agreement with perturbative results in the small and large
coupling regimes.
    The NNQSs that we use to obtain these results have up to 10k parameters, depending on the
depth and width of the networks.  To illustrate the computational resources and time needed for
training, in Figure1we plot the number of seconds per iteration and the number of seconds per


                                                             5
Figure 1:  The left figure shows seconds per training iteration as a function of lattice size L.  The
depths of the networks are chosen so that, with kernel size K = 2 per layer, the largest Wilson loop
is large enough to cover the entire lattice.  All other hyperparameters are identical.  The right figure
shows the number of seconds per network parameter for a single iteration.  The computations were
performed on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU.


network parameter for a single iteration for various lattice sizes.  The networks are the same size
as those used to obtain the results in the main text, with (Nout,K) = (4, 2) (see Section4.1) and
depths given bylog2L2 for an L×L lattice, so that the largest Wilson loops constructed by the
network can cover the full lattice.  We train our networks for 500 to 1000 iterations, with smaller
networks converging well before this and larger networks benefitting from longer training.  The
networks used for studying L = 12 systems train in approximately five hours on a single NVIDIA
A100 GPU [44].  In fact, the networks often converge well before this if one utilises transfer learning
when scanning over couplings (see Section4.2).


Outline

We begin in Section2by recalling           ZN  gauge theory on the lattice, including a discussion of Wilson
loops, the string tension and ‘t Hooft strings.  We also comment on the global symmetry of these
theories and their relation to ZN  spin models, their ground-state degeneracies and the potential
between static charges.  In Section3, we give more details on the phases of zero-temperature            ZN
gauge theories in 2 + 1 dimensions, including an overview of confined and deconfined phases, and the
expected nature of the transition for varying N.  In Section4, we introduce the ideas behind neural
network quantum states and compare them with traditional Euclidean Monte Carlo.  Following
this, we review the network architecture that we use in this work, namely lattice gauge-equivariant
convolutional neural networks [27].  We describe our implementation of this and give details of
sampling, initialisation, training, transfer learning and calculation of observables.  Thereafter, we
explain why the states represented by the networks are always in the trivial superselection sector of
the Z(1)N   one-form global symmetry.  With this groundwork set, in Section5we analyse            Z2 gauge

                                                             6
theory.  Our exploration includes computing ground-state energies as a function of coupling for
varying lattice size, and expectation values of order and disorder operators and the string tension.
Using finite-size scaling theory and curve collapse, we compute the critical coupling and critical
exponents characterising the theory’s continuous phase transition, finding excellent agreement with
previous results.  We then study the potential between static charges as a function of coupling,
recovering the expected linear dependence on distance.  We move to Z3 gauge theory in Section
6.  Here, we compute ground-state energies and look at order and disorder operators to identify
the  location  of  the  phase  transition.   By  looking  at  derivatives  of  the  energy  as  a  function  of
coupling, we argue that the transition is weakly first-order in nature.  We finish with a check that the
network has correctly learned charge conjugation symmetry and analyse the static charge potential.
The appendices contain an overview of our implementation of Wilson loop operators, a review of
calculating critical exponents from curve collapse, and a brief summary of the BST extrapolation
technique which we use to identify the critical coupling.


Future directions

Obvious next steps include examining ZN  theories for N > 3, extending our networks to continuous
gauge groups and including matter fields.  In particular, there is renewed interest in ZN  and U(1)
theories under the guise of studying flux tubes using confining strings [45,46], and it would be
interesting to investigate if mass gaps can be computed using NNQSs.  We also intend to study
theories in 3 + 1 dimensions; unlike approaches such as matrix product states, no conceptual changes
to the network architecture are needed to move to higher dimensions.
    Our identification of critical exponents for Z2 relies on curve collapse via a leading-order finite-
scaling analysis.  It would be interesting to see if incorporating subleading corrections gives more
precise estimates [47], even without going to larger system sizes.  In another direction, it would
be encouraging to observe signs of the discontinuities that characterise a first-order transition for
Z3 by studying larger lattices.  Moreover, since second R´enyi entropies can be computed efficiently
from a NNQS [48,49], it would be fruitful to study the entanglement structure of the ground state
and to determine the central charge of the CFTs governing the continuous phase transitions that
occur for N̸= 3.  Note that the replica method is another approach to computing the entanglement
entropy [50,51], and it will be insightful to compare the two techniques.
    We have not fully explored how to optimise the training process.  For example, we have used
transfer  learning  when  scanning  over  couplings.   Since  the  form  of  an  L-CNNs  is  system-size
agnostic, one could also use transfer learning to move from smaller to larger lattices as demonstrated
in [40,52].  It has also been observed that for ground states with non-trivial sign structure, it is often
helpful to first learn the phase of the wavefunction, with the amplitude learned towards the end of
training [53].  In a different direction, our ground-state wavefunctions were found by minimizing their



                                                             7
energy, however one might also try to minimise the variance of the energy.  Empirically, variance
minimization alone seems ill-suited for finding ground states [54], though some combination of the
two appears to improve performance [55].  It may also be useful to monitor other observables such
as expectation values of ‘t Hooft strings during training.  Since the systematic error in a general
observable depends linearly on the difference between the variational state and the true ground
state (while the energy is quadratic in the difference), tracking other observables may provide a
more sensitive measure of whether the network has converged.
    By construction, L-CNNs give wavefunctions which are invariant under both gauge transform-
ations and lattice translations.  In the future,  we plan to investigate whether including further
symmetries improves the accuracy of the variational state.  For example, the wavefunction should also
be invariant under rotations and reflections, which can be implemented using group convolutional
neural networks (G-CNNs) [56].  Rather than relying on the network learning this information,
imposing these symmetries exactly has been found to improve results [57].  Furthermore, one can
impose exact charge conjugation invariance, so that the amplitude for a lattice configurationU  is
the same as forU†.  This can be done simply by averaging the network overU  andU†.

2   ZN  lattice gauge theory

Following [27,58], we first review pure        ZN  gauge theory on the lattice.  In the Hamiltonian approach
to lattice gauge theory, space is discretized while time remains continuous.  Consider a spacelike
two-dimensional lattice corresponding to a lattice gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions, with periodic
boundary conditions.  The lattice spacing is taken to be one, and the size of the lattice is L×L.
    The gauge field degrees of freedom live on the links between the lattice sites.  The link variables
Ux,µ are valued in the gauge group.  Here our notation is that Ux,µ determines the parallel transport
from a lattice site at x to a neighbouring site x +µ, with µ = ˆeµ, where the lattice spacing is taken
to be one and  ˆeµ  is a unit vector pointing in the positive µ direction.  This is shown in Figure
2.  We denote a particular configuration of the 2 L2 link variables byU ={Ux,µ}.  Under a gauge
transformation, the link variables transform non-locally  as

                                          Ux,µ7→TΩUx,µ = ΩxUx,µΩ†x+µ,                                              (2.1)

where Ωx are group elements.
    The Hamiltonian of pure ZN  gauge theory can then be written as [58–60]

                               Xh                    i              X        h                                i
     H =HE +HB = g22                 2− (Pl +P†l )     +   12g2               2− (Q†l1Q†l2Ql3Ql4 + h.c.)       .      (2.2)
                                 l                             p=(l1,l2,l3,l4)

The first term is a sum over all linksl of the lattice, while the second term is a sum over all plaquettes


                                                            8
Figure 2:  The left figure shows our convention for associating link variables to a lattice site atx.  The
middle figure shows the links (l1,l2,l3,l4) which make up a plaquette p when defining the magnetic
term in the Hamiltonian (2.2)      .  The right figure shows the links associated with the operator Θx
acting at the lattice site at x, defined in (2.4), which implements Gauss’s law on the lattice.


p.  We refer to these as the electric and magnetic terms, respectively.  The links (l1,l2,l3,l4) make
up the plaquette p, as shown in Figure2.  The operators      Ql and Pl are the standard “clock” and
“shift” operators on the link l.  These unitary operators are generalizations of the Pauli operators
and satisfy a ZN  algebra:

                       P†lPl =Q†lQl = 1,   PNl   =QNl   = 1,   P†lQlPl = e−2πi/NQl,                    (2.3)

where operators that act on different links commute with one another.
     The discretised version of Gauss’s law for a ZN  gauge theory is encoded by a set of local unitary
vertex operators Θx.  For d = 2, these operators are defined as

                                              Θx =Px,µPx,νP†x−µ,µP†x−ν,ν,                                                 (2.4)

where µ = ˆx and ν = ˆy, so that the links correspond to those in Figure2.  The lattice Hamiltonian
commutes with all of these operators,

                                                     [Θx,H] = 0 ∀x,                                                         (2.5)

which implies the local gauge invariance of the theory.  The vertex operators have eigenvalues e2πin/N,
with operators for different sites commuting.  For a state|Ψ⟩, Gauss’s law is the statement that

                                                    Θx|Ψ⟩ =|Ψ⟩ ∀x.                                                        (2.6)

A state which satisfies this constraint is gauge invariant.  The ground state of the theory is always
gauge invariant.  There are, however, other superselection sectors of the Hilbert space of the theory,
classified by the eigenvalues of Θx.  For example, the twisted or charged sector where Θx = e2πin/N
and Θx′ = e2πin′/N  for integern andn′ can be interpreted as the gauge-invariant states with charges
n and n′ located at the lattice sites x and x′ respectively.


                                                                9
    The link variables Ux,µ are elements of ZN, and so can be thought of simply as phases of the
form e2πiq/N, where q∈{0,...,N− 1}.  With this, we define states|q⟩l  which span the Hilbert
space on the link l.  These states are assumed to give an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space,
⟨q|q′⟩ =δq,q′  and are eigenstates of the clock operator:

                                                   Ql|q⟩l = e2πiql/N|q⟩l.                                                       (2.7)

Moreover, the shift operator P  acts as a periodic lowering operator,

                                                     Pl|q⟩l =|q− 1⟩l,                                                          (2.8)

with Pl|0⟩l =|N− 1⟩l.  We also define plaquette variables Ux,µν  as 1× 1 untraced Wilson loops of
the form
                                            Ux,µν =Ux,µUx+µ,νU†x+ν,µU†x,ν.                                              (2.9)

Under (2.1), the plaquette variables transform        locally  as

                                           Ux,µν7→TΩUx,µν = ΩxUx,µνΩ†x.                                            (2.10)

For  our  example  of  a d  =  2  lattice,  we  take µ  =  ˆx  and ν  =  ˆy  so  that  the  loop  is  traversed
anticlockwise, in agreement with the convention in Figure2.
    At a given time, a wavefunction Ψ for the lattice system takes in a configurationU∈ Z2L2N ⊂ C2L2
of the link variables and returns a complex number:

                                              Ψ: C2L2→ C, U7→ Ψ(U).                                               (2.11)

We will be particularly interested in those wavefunctions which can approximate the ground state
of the system.  Since the Hamiltonian is time independent, the ground state is time independent, so
it is sufficient to consider only the two-dimensional spatial lattice for a 2 + 1-dimensional theory.
The ground state must also be gauge invariant.  Denoting the ground state by|Ψ0⟩, this means that
under the gauge transformation (2.1), the wavefunction Ψ        0 is invariant, i.e. Ψ0(TΩU) = Ψ0(U).2

2.1    Wilson loop operators

Naively, one might expect that, in analogy to the magnetization of a spin system, the phases of
a lattice gauge theory should be distinguished by a spontaneous alignment of the link degrees of
freedom.  This would manifest as a non-zero value of Pl⟨Ql⟩.  In the analogous spin system, a
non-zero magnetization indicates a spontaneous breaking of a global symmetry.  In the gauge theory,

   2More generally, a gauge equivariant function f  obeys f(TΩU) =TΩf(U).



                                                              10
Figure  3:  Order  and  disorder  operators  on  the  lattice.   The  blue  path  denotes  a  Wilson  loop,
WΓ =QΓQ, given by the product of clock operators along the closed contour Γ.  The shaded blue
region shows the area enclosed by the Wilson loop.  The dotted gray path denotes a ‘t Hooft string,
T˜Γ =Q˜ΓP , given by the product of shift operators on the links pierced by the contour  ˜Γ between
two points on the dual lattice.


a non-zero expectation value would instead imply the spontaneous breaking of a local symmetry.
This is impossible by Elitzur’s theorem [61], and so the phases of the theory cannot be distinguished
by these expectation values (which vanish by gauge invariance).  Instead, one must look at non-local,
gauge-invariant observables, the simplest of which is the Wilson loop.
    A Wilson loop operatorWΓ is defined given Γ, a closed oriented path on the lattice [1].  Explicitly,
we define
                                                      WΓ =Y        Ql,                                                           (2.12)
                                                               l∈Γ
where our convention is that if the link l is oriented to agree with the arrows in Figure2, one has
Ql, whereas if the link has the opposite orientation, one instead takes the Hermitian conjugate, Q†l .
Note that the magnetic term HB in the Hamiltonian is simply (1− reW□), summed over the 1× 1
plaquettes □.  An example of a Wilson loop on the lattice is shown in Figure3.
    In a pure ZN  gauge theory, the expectation values of Wilson loop operators can detect the
phase of the system [1,62,63].  In particular, whether the system is in a confined or deconfined
phase is determined by the scaling of the expectation value of WΓ as the size of the loop Γ is varied.
Therefore, the Wilson loop serves as an (unconventional) order operator for the lattice gauge theory.
In a deconfined phase, the magnetic term HB  in the Hamiltonian dominates and the expectation
value of the Wilson loop decays exponentially with the length of the perimeter PΓ of the loop as

                                                     ⟨WΓ⟩∼ e−κPΓ,                                                         (2.13)

where κ is coupling dependent.  In a confined phase, the electric term HE  dominates, leading to an


                                                             11
additional confining area-law scaling:

                                                  ⟨WΓ⟩∼ e−κPΓ−σAΓ,                                                     (2.14)

where AΓ  is the area of the loop and σ is known as the string tension.  Again, σ is expected to
depend on the couplingg.  Note that the Wilson loop does not follow a strict area law in the confined
phase since there is always a perimeter law contribution.

2.2    Creutz ratio

In the thermodynamic limit, one expects an order parameter to be positive in an ordered phase and
zero in a disordered phase.  The expectation values of Wilson loop operators do not display this
behaviour, and their interpretation is more nuanced.  Instead, as we discussed above, it is the scaling
with the size of the corresponding loop that is different in each phase.  However, this behaviour can
be used to extract the string tension, which gives a conventional order parameter.  It is simple to
check that the so-called Creutz ratio [64]


                                           χl =− ln⟨Wl×l⟩⟨W(l−1)×(l−1)⟩⟨W(l−1)×l⟩⟨Wl×(l−1)⟩,                                            (2.15)


where Wl×m is an l×m Wilson loop operator on the lattice, removes the perimeter scaling and
so computes the string tension, χl  = σ.  Due to this,  the Creutz ratio behaves like a standard
order parameter in the thermodynamic limit:  positive in the confining phase and vanishing in the
deconfined phase [65].  Note that the perimeter- and area-law scalings given in      (2.13)         and (2.14)         are
only the leading contributions.  The Creutz ratio is constructed to remove some subleading finite-size
corrections and also corrections that come from edge/corner effects.  The leftover corrections are
smaller for larger Wilson loops, so that χl is a better estimate of the continuum string tension for
larger values of l.
    Unfortunately, computing χl using Monte Carlo sampling can be challenging.  In the confined
phase, where χl  is expected to be non-zero, Wilson loops decay both with the area of the loop
and increasing coupling.  The string tension is then estimated by computing a ratio of very small
numbers, which can be very sensitive to Monte Carlo errors – we will see this later in Figure11.
Consequently, one often restricts the computation to smaller values of l.

2.3    ‘t Hooft operators

A string of P  operators, T  =Q˜ΓP , along an open path ˜Γ between two points on the dual  lattice
defines a magnetic line operator known as a ‘t Hooft string.  These ‘t Hooft strings serve as disorder
operators for the gauge theory, and can diagnose the confined-deconfined phases.  An example of a
‘t Hooft string operator is shown in Figure3.

                                                             12
    The insertion of a Gauss’s law operator Θx acts on a ‘t Hooft string simply by shifting the path
˜Γ without moving its endpoints.  Furthermore, since the ground state is gauge invariant, insertions
of Θx  are “free” and do not change expectation values.  Thus,⟨T˜Γ⟩ depends only the endpoints
of the string and not on the path itself.  This can be interpreted as the string operator creating a
pair of quasi-particles (magnetic monopoles) which reside on the plaquettes at either end of the
string, corresponding to the green dots in the example in Figure3.  Note that the distance between
the end points must scale with the lattice size L in order to obtain a line operator in the limit as
L→∞.  In a deconfined phase, the expectation value of a ‘t Hooft string decays exponentially with
the distance between its endpoints.  In a confined phase,⟨T˜Γ⟩ is independent of distance, since the
monopoles living at the ends of the ‘t Hooft string are condensed.

2.4    Global symmetry and dual spin models

ZN  gauge theory in 2 + 1d can be obtained by gauging the Z(0)N   zero-form global symmetry of a ZN
spin model.  The Z(0)N   symmetry corresponds to transforming all spins of the model by a global ZN
factor.  In the case of the Ising model, we have a Z2 symmetry that corresponds to flipping all the
spins.  By Poincar´e duality, we expect that the theory after gauging will have a dual Z(1)N   one-form
global symmetry in 2 + 1 dimensions [66].  The phase transitions that occur in     ZN  gauge theories
are characterised by breaking or restoration of this one-form global symmetry.  In the following
subsection, we will use this one-form global symmetry to study the ground-state degeneracy of these
theories at small coupling.
    On  a  torus,  these  global  symmetry  operators  are  magnetic  ‘t  Hooft  loops  wrapping  non-
contractible cycles.  Similar to ‘t Hooft strings,  these operators are topological and depend on
only the homotopy class of the loops.  However, unlike the open string operators, the closed loops
intersect each plaquette exactly twice and, as a result, they commute with the magnetic term of
the Hamiltonian.  Since they are built from the P  operators, they manifestly commute with the
electric term of the Hamiltonian and thus commute with the entire Hamiltonian for all values of the
coupling g [67,68].
    As a result of the gauging procedure, the local  operators that transform non-trivially under the
Z(0)N   zero-form global symmetry are projected out.  In contrast, extended line operators with these
charges at their end points are a part of the spectrum of the gauge theory [69].  Examples of such
extended operators include the Wilson and ‘t Hooft line operators discussed earlier.  Since local
gauge symmetries cannot break spontaneously on a finite lattice, these extended operators can serve
as order parameters for diagnosing phase transitions.







                                                           13
Figure 4:  Low-lying energy levels of Z2 lattice gauge theory computed using exact diagonalization
on an L = 2 lattice.  Away from g = 0, there is a unique ground state (teal), with an approximate
fourfold degeneracy for small but non-zero couplings.

2.5    Ground-state degeneracy

ZN  gauge theory has interesting low-lying state structure on lattices with non-trivial topology, such
as the torus defined by our periodic boundary conditions.  Focusing on Z2 for concreteness, these
states can be discerned from the global symmetry operators wrapping the two non-contractible
cycles of the torus [67].  The magnetic ‘t Hooft loops which wrap the  x and y directions of the torus
are denoted by Vx and Vy  respectively.  As with ‘t Hooft strings, these operators are topological
and depend on only the homotopy class of the loops.  Since these two operators commute with the
Hamiltonian, even when the eigenstates of H are degenerate one can find a basis of states which are
simultaneously eigenstates of the Hamiltonian and Vx,y.
    In the g→∞ limit, the ground state|Ψ0⟩ is given by all links in the +1 eigenstate of the shift
operator (X  for Z2), and so the ground state has eigenvalue +1 for both Vx and Vy.  States with
different Vx,y eigenvalues must have at least one spin in the−1 eigenstate of the X operator, which
will cost an energy∼g2.  As a result, these states cannot be degenerate with the ground state, so
that|Ψ0⟩ is unique even in the L→∞ limit.
    As g→ 0, we can express the ground state in terms of the basis of the clock operator which
is Z  for Z2.   By  taking  linear  combinations,  we  can  express  the  four  lowest  energy  states  as
(1±Vx)(1±Vy)|0⟩⊗2L2  with eigenvalues Vx =±1 and Vy =±1.  At g = 0, these states have the
same energy, giving a fourfold degeneracy for the ground state.  For small but non-zero couplings,
these Vx,y eigenstates are no longer degenerate, but separated by a splitting that scales as g4L with
the size L of the lattice [67].  As a result, the splitting becomes exponentially small deep in the


                                                           14
deconfined phase, g≪ 1.  This effect occurs since there is non-zero tunneling amplitude between
states with distinct values of Z2 flux.  In the general case of ZN  gauge theory on a closed compact
oriented surface Σ with first homology group H1(Σ,ZN), the ground state degeneracy for g = 0 is
given by [70]
                                 Ground-state degeneracy on Σ =N|H1(Σ,ZN)|,                                 (2.16)

where|H1(Σ,ZN)| = 2 if Σ is a torus.  This degeneracy is one of the characteristic features of ZN
topological order [71–77].
    The behaviours we have discussed actually persist throughout the deconfined and confined phases.
In general, for g̸= 0 the ground state is unique and has eigenvalue +1 for both Vx and Vy.  Below
the critical coupling, for Z2, there is an approximate fourfold degeneracy with a splitting governed
by the size of the lattice that goes to zero as g→ 0.  This can be seen in Figure4, which shows the
lowest-lying states of Z2 gauge theory on a 2× 2 lattice computed using exact diagonalization.  One
observes the approximate fourfold degeneracy at small couplings, with the gap growing with g.

2.6    Potential energy between charges

As reviewed earlier, the uncharged sector of the Hilbert space, describing the gauge field degrees
of freedom, is the subsector which satisfies Θx|Ψ⟩ =|Ψ⟩ for all lattice sites x.  We now discuss the
subsectors with static charges placed at the lattice sites.  Since the insertion of a single charge at a
lattice site is not gauge invariant, the simplest setup one can consider is an open Wilson line with
opposite charges at each end.  Starting from a gauge-invariant state|Ψ⟩, one can introduce charges
by acting with a string of clock operators that stretch between lattice sites on which the charges are
placed.  For example, the following string operator can be used to place the charges a distance r
apart along the x-direction:
                                           Wr =Qx,µQx+ˆx,µ...Qx+rˆx,µ.                                              (2.17)

Note that the charges in the ZN  theory are constrained to be{0, 1,...,N− 1}.  Using the ZN
commutation relations, one finds

                   Θx(Wr|Ψ⟩) = e−2πi/N(Wr|Ψ⟩),        Θx+rˆx(Wr|Ψ⟩) = e2πi/N(Wr|Ψ⟩).               (2.18)

From these phases, one deduces that the Wilson line connects static charges at x and x +rˆx, with
charges N− 1 and 1 respectively.  To compute the potential between the charges, one can compare
the ground-state energies with and without the charges.  In practice, this means one compares

                                               ⟨H⟩0    vs ⟨W†rHWr⟩0′,                                                  (2.19)





                                                             15
where the expectation values are evaluated using the ground-state wavefunction in each sector,
denoted by 0 and 0′ respectively.
    Let us now analyse the potential energy V (r) needed to separate the charges in the limit of very
small and large values ofg.  Wheng≪ 1, the magnetic term in the Hamiltonian (2.2)       dominates and
as a result the ground state is an eigenvector of Ql with eigenvalue +1 for all links l.  Consequently,
the Wilson line operator Wr leaves the ground state unchanged.  Therefore, pulling the charges out
of the vacuum and separating them does not take any energy, thus the charges are deconfined.
    In the opposite limit, when g≫ 1, the electric term in the Hamiltonian (2.2)       dominates and the
ground state is an eigenvector of Pl with eigenvalue +1 for all links l.  Employing the commutation
relations (2.3)      , we observe that theQ operators forming the Wilson line (2.17)         modify the eigenvalues
ofPl andP†l  along the Wilson line to e2πi/N  and e−2πi/N, respectively.  To first-order in perturbation
theory,  the ground-state energy in the twisted sector is given by evaluating W†rHWr  using the
untwisted ground-state wavefunction.3  Plugging this back into the Hamiltonian, and neglecting the
magnetic term which is very small in this limit, one finds that the energy difference is linear in the
distance r
                               V (r)≈⟨W†rHWr⟩0−⟨H⟩0 =g2r 1− cos(2π/N).                             (2.20)

We see that it costs a great deal of energy to increase the separation between the charges, implying
that the charges are confined.  Note that one can instead place charges k and N−k on the two
ends by acting with the operator Wkr .  In this case, the potential energy in the confined phase is
given by V (r)≈g2r(1− cos(2πk/N)).
    In summary, the energy needed to separate the charges differs in the two phases.  In the confined
phase, the potential energy rises linearly with the distance between the charges, corresponding to
the formation of a confining flux tube or string between the charges.  In the deconfined phase, the
electric flux lines are condensed and the potential between the charges is very small, becoming
independent of distance in the limit of large L.
    It is useful to compare this perspective with Euclidean lattice gauge theory, where a timelike
Polyakov  loop  (a  Wilson  loop  extended  in  imaginary  time)  serves  as  an  order  parameter  for
confinement.  The expectation value of this non-local operator is then related to the free energy of
an isolated static charge.  In particular, it should be zero in the confined phase, indicating an infinite

   3Experimentally, we have observed negligible difference between evaluating the expectation of W†rHWr  using
the “true” ground state in the twisted sector and the ground state of the sector without static charges, at least for
couplings in the range 0.5 to 1.1.  Using the ZN  operator identities, the result of conjugating the Hamiltonian by thePr−1 Px+i,µ(1− e−2πi/N) + h.c., where the second term can be thought
Wilson string operator isW†rHWr =H + g22           i=0
of as a perturbation.  Since the original Hamiltonian is given by a sum over 2L2 links, while the perturbation is a
sum over only r links, the parameter controlling the size of the perturbation is r/2L2 which will be small for large
enough lattices.  Providing the gap between the original ground state and the first excited state is large compared
with the energy shift due to the perturbation, one will get a good estimate of the perturbed ground-state energy
using first-order perturbation theory, where one computes the correction by evaluating the expectation value of the
perturbation using the unperturbed ground state.



                                                               16
free energy cost for isolating a single charge.  Conversely, a non-zero Polyakov loop expectation
value signals deconfinement, where isolated charges can exist.  To directly study confinement, one
instead considers the correlation function of two timelike Polyakov loops separated in space.  If
the theory is in the confined phase, this correlation function should decay exponentially with the
separation, reflecting the linear confining potential between the static charges represented by the
Polyakov loops.  Note that it is only in the continuum limit where Lorentz invariance emerges that
one can directly relate spatial and timelike Wilson loops, and thus identify the string tension σ
appearing in (2.14)         with the coefficient of the linear potential between static charges.  Away from
this limit, these two quantities do not necessarily agree.

3    Phases and phase transitions in ZN  theories

The central aim of this paper is to use neural network quantum states to model the ground-state
wavefunction of ZN  lattice gauge theories.  Beyond simply computing the energy of the ground
state, one can use this approach to study the phases and phase transitions as the coupling g is
varied.  With this in mind, we now review some useful concepts for studying transitions and critical
behaviour on the lattice.

3.1    First-order vs continuous phase transitions

In quantum mechanics, a first-order phase transition is characterised by level-crossing in the energy
spectrum.  This means that, as a parameter in the Hamiltonian (such as the coupling g) is varied,
the energy levels of two distinct states intersect.  At the point of intersection, the ground state of
the system changes abruptly from one state to another.  The ground-state energy of the system


                                             E0 =⟨H⟩0≡⟨Ψ0|H|Ψ0⟩⟨Ψ0|Ψ0⟩ ,                                                  (3.1)


has a kink at the transition point, while the derivative of the energy with respect to the coupling is
discontinuous.  This abrupt change is the hallmark of a first-order phase transition.  For the case of
the first-order transitions, the energy gap between the lowest energy state and the first excited state
remains finite even as the ground state energy levels cross and as a result of this gap the system has
finite correlation length.
    For a lattice gauge theory, in the limit where the lattice size is much greater than the correlation
length  of  the  system,  one  expects  a  sharp  change  between  an  ordered  and  a  disordered  state.
Moreover, the order parameters which characterise the order and disordered states also display a
discontinuity at the transition.  For finite L, the ordered and disordered states coexist in the vicinity
of the transition.  The sharp kink in the energy is smoothed somewhat, with the derivative of the
energy displaying a large gradient at the transition point.


                                                            17
Figure 5:  Phases of ZN  gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions.  The deconfined and confined phases are
separated by a confinement transition as the critical coupling gc.


    Unlike a first-order transition,  a continuous quantum phase transition occurs without level-
crossing.  Here, the ground state of the system evolves smoothly as a function of the coupling.  There
is no abrupt change in the ground state, but rather a gradual change in its properties.  The smooth
change of the state is mirrored in the smooth change of the ground-state energy, in contrast to
the kink/discontinuity at a first-order transition.  When such a continuous phase transition occurs,
the spectral gap between the ground state and the first excited state closes.  Consequently, the
correlation length of the system diverges, leading to the onset of long-range correlations across the
system [78].  Due to the resulting scale invariance of the system, continuous critical phenomenon can
be characterised using critical exponents, which capture the behaviour of physical quantities near
the phase transition.  For many quantum-mechanical lattice models, such as lattice gauge theory, the
system at the critical coupling has an enhanced conformal symmetry in addition to scale invariance
leading to a conformal field theory (CFT) [79].

3.2    Confined and deconfined phases

In 2 + 1 dimensions, discrete gauge theories with a Hamiltonian given by (2.2)       have two possible
phases.  They are in a deconfined phase at weak coupling and in a confined phase at strong coupling.
As explained in Section2.6,  in the deconfined phase it takes very little energy to separate the
charges, while in the confined phase the energy required to pull charges apart grows linearly with
the length of the flux string.  The expectation values of Wilson loops follow a perimeter law in
the deconfined phase and an area law in the confined phase, as described in Section2.1.  Since
the magnetic monopoles are in condensed in the deconfined phase, the value of a ‘t Hooft string
operator is independent of distance in this phase.  The deconfined phase is topologically ordered,
with a ground state degeneracy that depends on the topology of the system.  This topologically
ordered state has long-range quantum entanglement [80].  The     Z(1)N   one-form symmetry is preserved
in the confined phase, while it is broken in the deconfined phase.  These characteristics of the two
phases are summarised in Figure5.







                                                            18
3.3    Confinement transition

The nature of the confinement phase transition depends on N, with a first-order transition for
N = 3 and a continuous transition occurring for all other values of N  [81 –83].  Evidence for this
comes from Monte Carlo simulation of spin systems, which are dual to these lattice gauge theories.
Furthermore, high-order perturbative expansions confirm the Monte Carlo simulation results [84,85].
As explained in Section2.4, this duality corresponds to gauging the global             ZN  zero-form symmetry
in the spin-system to obtain the lattice gauge theory.  As a result,  in the case of a continuous
transition the theory at the critical coupling gc is described by the gauged version of the CFT that
describes the continuous transition in the corresponding spin system.
    The second-order phase transition for the transverse-field Ising model is in the universality class
of 2 + 1-d Ising Wilson–Fisher CFT. Thus, the confinement phase transition for the Z2 lattice gauge
theory belongs to the 2 + 1-d gauged Ising universality class [67].  This theory is also sometimes
referred to as the Ising∗ theory.  In Section5, we calculate the critical exponents for this transition
using  neural  network  quantum  states.   For Z3,  we  observe  the  first-order  nature  of  the  phase
transition and determine the approximate location of the critical coupling in Section6.
    Remarkably, the Z4 theory decomposes into two decoupled Z2 theories for every value of the
coupling, with the critical point hosting two copies of the 2 + 1-d Ising∗ CFT [86].  Monte Carlo
simulations suggest that the continuous transitions forN > 4 belong to the 2 + 1-d XY (O(2) model)
universality class [83,87].  The critical coupling at which the confinement transition occurs goes
to zero as the value of N  increases.  The N→∞ limit recovers U(1) lattice gauge theory, which
is confined for all values of the coupling [81].  As shown by Polyakov, this is a result of the fact
that certain monopole operators are relevant, leading to a phase of unbroken Z(1)N   one-form global
symmetry [88,89].  The phase diagram is much richer in 3 + 1 dimensions, with two phase transitions
occurring for N≥ 5 [90,91].  Investigating these phase transitions in 3 + 1 dimensions with neural
network quantum states will be a fruitful direction for future work.
    Note that the critical couplings (or inverse temperatures) at which the transition occurs computed
with Monte Carlo methods are not directly comparable to the critical couplings that one finds from
a Hamiltonian approach.  The reason for this is that the time direction of the d + 1-dimensional
spacetime is also discretized.  In order to recover the Hamiltonian perspective, one must take a
certain  anisotropic  limit  of  the  lattice  [92,93],  which  comes  with  a  non-trivial  rescaling  of  the
couplings of the theory.  For this reason, other than for simple examples, it is difficult to directly
compare the location of phase transitions in the two approaches.









                                                             19
                                Monte Carlo                      Neural network quantum states
                         Computes path integral                   Computes ground state
                  d + 1-dimensional spacetime lattice   d-dimensional spatial lattice
                                Sign problem                                 No sign problem
                  Asymptotic convergence guarantee         No convergence guarantee
                        Difficult sampling problem            Difficult optimisation problem
                           Few hyperparameters                     Many hyperparameters

Table 1:  Brief comparison of path-integral Monte Carlo (MC) and neural network quantum state
(NNQS) approaches.

4    Neural network quantum states

There is a long history of using the variational method to find approximations to the ground-state
wavefunction of quantum-mechanical systems [94].  This relies on the observation that, given the
system’s Hamiltonian H and a normalisable wavefunction Ψθ, where θ are parameters that specify
the particular wavefunction from a family of variational states, the functional4


                                              Eθ =⟨H⟩θ≡⟨Ψθ|H|Ψθ⟩⟨Ψθ|Ψθ⟩ ,                                                  (4.1)


is bounded from below by the true ground-state energy E0 of the system, with Eθ =E0 if and only
if Ψθ is the exact ground-state wavefunction of the system.  Thus, by minimizing Eθ with respect to
the parameters θ, one obtains an approximation to both the ground-state energy and wavefunction
itself.
    The  more  flexible  the  variational  ansatz,  the  better  the  resulting  approximation  should  be.
Moreover,  if  the  form  of  Ψθ  is  particularly  well  suited  to  the  system,  one  expects  that  fewer
parameters are needed to obtain a good approximation.  For example, for the simple harmonic
oscillator, an ansatz of a Gaussian in the square of the displacement needs only a single parameter
to describe the exact ground state, while an ansatz in terms of Fourier modes would need more
parameters (and an infinite number to capture the exact ground state). Finding a good approximation
to the ground state of a complicated quantum system then requires variational states which are well
suited for the system under consideration and flexible enough to capture the relevant physics.
    Neural network quantum states (NNQS) were developed in 2016 by Carleo and Troyer as a new
kind of variational ansatz for quantum systems [14].  Their idea was to use a neural network as the
trial wavefunction of a quantum system, with the parameters of the network chosen to minimise the
expectation value of the Hamiltonian.  In their most basic form, neural networks give a map from
inputs to outputs, with the map given by compositions of linear transformations and non-linear
activation functions.  In our case, we are interested in networks which map from a configuration

   4Here we are explicitly dividing by the norm of the variational state.  For ease of notation, we often suppress this
and assume that the state is correctly normalized, though in practice it is simpler to work with unnormalized NNQSs.


                                                            20
of link variables to a single complex number, C2L2→ C, so that the network can be interpreted
as assigning a probability amplitude to a given lattice configuration.  The linear transformations
can be thought of as acting with matrices whose entries are known as “weights”, which are then
interpreted as variational parameters.  The non-linear activation functions, often alternated with the
linear transformations, result in the network output being a complicated non-linear function of the
variational parameters.  Thanks to this, NNQSs can capture a wide range of phenomena, including
ground-state wavefunctions.
    A NNQS gives a variational ansatz Ψθ for the wavefunction parametrised by the choice of weights
θ.  The next question is how to choose these weights so that Ψθ provides an approximation to the
ground state of a given quantum system.  Again, one can use the variational method by trying
to minimise the expectation value of the Hamiltonian with respect to the weights of the neural
network.  Since the network is a complicated non-linear function of these weights, and these weights
often number in the thousands or tens of thousands, it is not possible to solve this minimization
problem exactly.  Instead, one resorts to numerical methods to iteratively reduce Eθ  by varying
the weights.  The way to do this is (stochastic) gradient descent.  The key to this is the fact that
modern neural network packages allow for automatic differentiation, so that one can differentiate
Eθ with respect to the weights θ and evaluate the resulting gradient exactly (that is, without using
finite differences).  Given this gradient, one adjusts the weights to move in the direction of steepest
descent.  By repeatedly iterating, one hopes to “train” the network and eventually find the set of
weights which minimiseEθ.  At the end of training, one not only has an estimate of the ground-state
energy, but also an approximation Ψθ for the exact ground-state wavefunction Ψ0.


MC vs NNQS

Before describing the gauge-invariance networks we will use in this paper, let us quickly compare
traditional Monte Carlo (MC) methods with neural network quantum states (NNQS) for studying
lattice theories:

    •  Dimensionality of the lattice:  In NNQS, the trial wavefunction is defined on the d-dimensional
       spatial lattice.  In MC, fields are defined on a d + 1-dimensional lattice that includes the
       imaginary time direction.

    •  Variational principle:  NNQS relies on a variational principle, wherein the trial wavefunction is
       optimised to minimise the energy expectation value.  MC does not involve any optimisation,
       but  instead  aims  to  directly  evaluate  the  path  integral  on  the  lattice  using  Monte  Carlo
       sampling.

    •  Sampling problem:  In NNQS, one generates configurations of gauge fields on a d-dimensional
       lattice  weighted  according  to  the  trial  wavefunction.   In  MC,  one  instead  samples d + 1-


                                                           21
       dimensional lattice configurations weighted according to the Euclidean action e−S.

    •  Sign problem:  In Monte Carlo (MC) simulations, a sign problem occurs because the fermion
       determinants in the path integral can turn complex in the presence of a finite chemical potential
       or a non-zero theta angle.  This complexity makes it difficult to treat e−S  as a straightforward
       probability measure, which prevents the use of standard Monte Carlo methods.  Moreover, even
       when one can absorb the complex phase, evaluating expectation values often requires extremely
       high accuracies due to possible cancellations.  This sign problem is absent in NNQS, since one
       samples from the Born distribution|Ψ|2, meaning that standard Monte Carlo sampling can
       be used.5

    •  Convergence:  In the absence of sign problem, MC is guaranteed to converge asymptotically
       when a sufficient number of samples have been drawn.  Nevertheless, number of steps required
       to adequately sample the system increases as the critical point is approached due to critical
       slowing, making simulations near criticality computationally expensive [95].  In contrast, a
       fixed network has limited expressivity [96] and may not capable of representing the true ground
       state of a system.  Furthermore, even if a network is capable of representing the ground state,
       there is no guarantee that gradient based optimisation methods will efficiently find the optimal
       set of parameters.

    •  Systematic improvements:  In MC, systematic improvements come from improving the Monte
       Carlo  sampling  and  summing  over  more  lattice  configurations.   The  accuracy  of  NNQS
       can be systematically improved by using more sophisticated trial wavefunctions with more
       variational expressivity.  However, there is a trade-off between expressivity and the efficiency
       of optimisation.

    •  Observables:  In MC, observables are calculated as ensemble averages over the generated lattice
       configurations, which are related to the path integral.  In NNQS, observables are calculated
       directly as expectation values of operators with respect to the trial wavefunction.

    •  Hyperparameters:  NNQS involve a large number of hyperparameters including the number of
       layers in the network, the number of neurons per layer, the type of activation functions, the
       initialisation methods and the learning rate.  The selection and tuning of these hyperparameters
       can  greatly  influence  the  learning  dynamics  and  the  accuracy  of  the  models.   The  key
       hyperparameters in the MC approach are the number of samples and the choice of update
       algorithm.  Although the update algorithm affects the rate of convergence, the overall method
       is quite robust.

   5Note that one can still run into sign problems when considering operators with non-trivial phase structure, so
that expectation values rely on many cancellations, leading to large variances in Monte Carlo estimates.



                                                            22
Another point to emphasise are the trade-offs between MC and NNQS in situations where both
can be used.  One swaps a higher-dimensional sampling problem for a lower-dimensional sampling
problem with an additional optimisation problem.  Naively, this optimisation problem may eat up
any efficiency gain in reducing the dimension of the lattice.  However, this optimisation problem can
be put on hardware designed for large-scale machine learning tasks, such as clusters of GPUs, while
utilising existing software libraries which implement automatic differentiation, etc.  In addition, one
also benefits from “transfer learning” – the wavefunction for a lattice system found for one value of
a coupling will give a good starting point for the wavefunction at a nearby coupling.  Thanks to this,
one does not have to solve the optimisation problem from scratch when scanning over couplings or
probing phase diagrams.  The differences between the two methods discussed above are summarised
in Table1.

4.1    L-CNNs

The neural network architecture that we will use to approximate the ground state of a ZN  lattice
gauge theory is a so-called “lattice gauge-equivariant convolutional neural network”, or L-CNN.
This particular architecture was introduced by Favoni et al. in [27] as a way to approximate a large
class of gauge-equivariant or gauge-invariant functions of a lattice system.6  In our case, since the
network should approximate the ground-state wavefunction of the system, we want the network
output to be gauge invariant.
    An L-CNN is made up of constituent “layers”.  Depending on their construction, the layers
can do a variety of operations, including gauge-equivariant convolutions and multiplications, and
acting with activation functions.  For our purposes, we will need three of these layers, namely a
plaquette layer, a convolution layer and a bilinear layer.  At each layer, we keep track of two sets of
data.  The first is the set of link variablesU ={Ux,µ}, which transforms non-locally under gauge
transformations, as in (2.1)      .  The second set transforms locally under gauge transformations, as in
(2.10)        .  We refer to these collectively asW ={Wx,i}.  Here,i is a “channel” index which allows us to
associate multipleW  elements to the same lattice site at x.  The plaquette variables{Ux,µν} are an
example of these with a single channel; an L-CNN will naturally construct more general quantities
which transform in the same way.  We give a schematic diagram of an L-CNN in Figure6.
    Each layer of the L-CNN can be thought of as acting on the pair (U,W).  The initial input to
the network is the set of link variablesU, describing a gauge field configuration on the lattice, while
W is initially empty.  The first layer carries out “preprocessing”, generating the plaquette variables
from the link variables.  This is done via a Plaq layer:

                                                 Plaq: Ux,µ7→Ux,µν.                                                      (4.2)

   6See also [34,35] for an alternative gauge-equivariant architecture.



                                                            23
Figure 6:  A schematic of an L-CNN with a single L-CB layer with (Nout,K) = (2, 1) and no
Dense-SELU layers.  Here, the input is a configuration of link variablesU  ={Ux,µ}.  The first
layer, Plaq, converts the link variables into plaquette variables and stores them asW  ={Wx}
in  a  single  channel.   The L-Conv  layer  then  parallel  transports  the  plaquette  variables  by  up
to one lattice site in the positive x and y directions, giving a new set of plaquette-like variables
W′ ={Wx,Wx+ˆx,Wx+ˆy} with three channels.  The setsW  andW′ are then multiplied by element-
wise multiplication (denoted by the Hadamard product⊙), givingWx⊙Wx (squares of 1× 1 loops),
Wx⊙Wx+ˆx  (2× 1 loops), and Wx⊙Wx+ˆy  (1× 2 loops).  Since Nout = 2, one then takes linear
combinations of these (determined by the weights αijk) to give two output channels.  Finally, a
global pooling layer averages each of these channels over the lattice, giving two neurons which can
be processed further.  To help the reader follow variables through the network, we have highlighted
three 1× 1 plaquettes in blue, green and orange.  Red dots indicate the lattice points to which the
plaquette variables are associated.  For example, the action of Wx⊙Wx+ˆx equivariantly multiplies
the blue plaquette by the orange plaquette (since they are associated to the same lattice point),
resulting in a 2× 1 plaquette.







                                                          24
The plaquette variables are then stored inW.  As in [27], to reduce redundancy, we generate only
the anticlockwise plaquettes (those with positive orientation in higher dimensions).
    The next layer allows the parallel transport of objects stored inW  from one lattice site to a
neighbouring site.  This is implemented as a convolutional layer, L-Conv, given explicitly by

                            L-Conv: (Ux,µ,Wx,i)7→X               ωijµkUx,kµWx+kµ,jU†x,kµ,                            (4.3)
                                                            j,µ,k

where ωijµ∈ C are the “weights” or parameters of the convolutional layer, i and j  run over the
number of output and input channels respectively, and µ∈{ˆx, ˆy} for a d = 2 lattice.  The index
k runs over 0,...,K, where K  is an integer which determines the maximum lattice distance to
translate theW  quantities, or equivalently the kernel size of the convolution.7
    Finally, we need a layer which multiplies two setsW  andW′ in an equivariant manner.  This is
done via an L-Bilin layer:

                                   L-Bilin: (Wx,i,W′x,i′)7→X           αijkWx,jW′x,k,                                     (4.4)
                                                                   j,k

whereαijk∈ C are weights,j andk run over the number of input channels forW andW′ respectively,
and i runs over the number of output channels.  Since this layer multiplies locally transforming
variables at the same position x, the output is again locally transforming, so that the layer output
is gauge equivariant.  For ZN  gauge theories, the gauge group is abelian and so the link variables
are simply phases.  Thanks to this, the traced and untraced Wilson loops are equivalent, and any
function of theW  variables is automatically gauge invariant.
    In practice, prior to multiplying,W  andW′ are extended by including the Hermitian conjugate
of all their elements, and the unit matrix 1 at each lattice site.  A little thought should convince the
reader that this allows the layer to include a bias and act as a residual module (i.e. the output also
contains a linear combination of the inputs) [97].  As in [27], we combine         L-Conv and L-Bilin into
a single L-CB layer with a single set of trainable weights.  A choice of L-CB layer is then fixed by
a choice of (Nout,K), i.e. the number of output channels and the kernel size of the convolution.
    The power of an L-CNN is in the fact that by stacking L-CB layers, one can construct arbitrary
(untraced) Wilson loops, and so approximate any gauge equivariant function.  For example, after a
Plaq layer, one has all 1× 1 Wilson loops.  Following this with an L-CB layer, the output includes
linear combinations of 1× 2 and 2× 1 Wilson loops (and 1× 1 loops and squares of 1× 1 loops when
theW variables are extended by the unit matrix).  If the number of output channels is large enough,
in principle, one can capture all possible Wilson loops of area two and below.  With another L-CB
layer, the output includes loops up to area four.  This also makes clear that L-CNNs exploit locality
on the spatial lattice, with nearby Wilson loops more likely to be multiplied together compared

   7We restrict to non-negative shifts along the lattice.


                                                            25
with distant loops.
    Clearly, the number of possible Wilson loops grows very quickly with area, so quickly that one
cannot hope to optimise a variational ansatz constructed by simply taking combinations of all loops.
Instead, by restricting the size of the output channels, an L-CNN works with a much smaller number
of combinations of loop variables.  During training, the network then determines which combinations
to keep within this much smaller subspace.  It is this restriction that ensures an L-CNN variational
ansatz has a sub-exponential number of parameters.  For example, for Z2 gauge theory on a 10× 10
lattice, there are 22×102≈ 1060 possible lattice configurations, and so modeling the wavefunction
as a “look-up table” that assigns an amplitude to each of these is clearly intractable.8  Instead,
using an L-CNN with seven L-CB layers with (Nout,K) = (4, 2) leads to a variational ansatz with
approximately 104 parameters.  As we will see, this network is sufficient to accurately capture the
physics of the ground state, and so an L-CNN clearly gives an efficient encoding of the wavefunction.

4.2    NetKet implementation

We have implemented this network architecture using NetKet [36], a machine-learning framework
for many-body quantum physics.  NetKet is built on top of JAX [37], a framework for Python
which allows automatic differentiation and GPU acceleration, with its neural network components
implemented using Flax [98].  The network output is taken to be      log Ψθ.  Thanks to the complex
weights of the network, the output is complex, so can accommodate a wavefunction with non-trivial
phase structure.  Schematically, as a functional, the wavefunction is given by the composition of the
following layers

                  log Ψθ≡ Dense◦···◦ Dense-SELU◦ Pooling◦···◦ L-CB◦ Plaq,               (4.5)

where the final layers are fully connected dense layers, each followed by a scaled exponential linear
unit layer (Dense-SELU), and a dense layer with a single neuron (Dense).  Each L-CB layer is
labeled by a choice of (Nout,K), the number of output channels and the kernel size, while each
Dense-SELU layer is fixed by Nfeat, a choice of the number of neurons or “features” in the dense
layer.
    The network is trained using the in-built features of NetKet.  Specifically, training attempts to
minimise Eθ, the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the variational state.  It does this using
automatic differentiation to compute the derivative (gradient) of Eθ with respect to the parameters
(weights) of the network, and then stochastic gradient descent to move in the steepest direction of
lower energy.  In addition, NetKet includes the option to precondition the gradient – we use the
quantum geometric tensor in all numerical experiments in this paper, with the resulting dynamics

   8This is obviously an overcounting, as the ground-state wavefunction depends only on gauge-invariant data and
should also be invariant under translations, etc., but the rough level of complexity is what the reader should take away.


                                                            26
known as stochastic reconfiguration.9  We further elucidate the training process below.


Sampling

Gradient descent requires the calculation of Eθ and its gradient with respect to the parameters of
the network at each training step.  In principle, computing these quantities requires summing over
the Hilbert space of the system.  Since the Hilbert space of gauge field configurations is too large to
sum over exactly, one must instead use stochastic gradient descent with an estimate of the gradient.
The expectation values of observables and their gradients with respect to the network parameters
are computed using a representative sample of configurations which approximate the full sum over
the Hilbert space.  Here, representative means that a configurationU  is sampled according to its
probability|Ψθ(U)|2.  These are selected via a standard local Metropolis algorithm.  As Ψθ converges
to the ground-state wavefunction, the sampling becomes better at reproducing the sum over the
Hilbert space.
    Obviously, in order to actually move in the direction of decreasing energy, one needs reasonably
accurate estimates of the gradient of the energy.  Since this gradient is calculated approximately by
summing over a sample of lattice configurations, one might worry that this gradient (or the energy
itself) cannot be estimated to sufficient accuracy without using a very large number of samples.
However, the Hamiltonian is a particularly well-behaved observable as it satisfies the “zero-variance
property”.10  Given a trial wavefunction Ψθ, one can consider both the variational error in the
energy, Eθ−E0, and the variance,⟨(H−Eθ)2⟩θ.  One can show that both the variational error
and the variance are second order in the difference between the trial wavefunction Ψθ  and the
true ground-state wavefunction Ψ0.  In the limit where Ψθ = Ψ0, both the error and the variance
vanish, so that Eθ =E0.  Moreover, since the variance determines the statistical error, the error in
computing the gradient of the variational energy due to Monte Carlo sampling also decreases as Ψθ
approaches Ψ0.  Thanks to this, one does not need a large number of samples when estimating the
energy or its gradient.
    For the experiments described in this paper, each stochastic gradient descent step is evaluated
using 4096 configurations.  The number of sweeps (the number of Metropolis steps taken before
returning a sample, i.e. the subsampling factor of the Markov chain) is chosen to be equal to the
number of degrees of freedom of the Hilbert space.  This is simply the number of links, so that for an
L×L lattice, 2L2 sweeps are made.  Combined with a warm-up phase, we found this to be sufficient
to ensure reasonably small correlation of the Monte Carlo chains and an acceptable autocorrelation
time.  When approaching critical couplings, an increase in the number of sweeps was needed.

   9See, for example, [36, Section 4.1] for a discussion of this.
  10See, for instance, the discussion in [99]





                                                            27
Initialisation

Since L-CB layers are multiplicative, when using deep networks, it is essential to properly initialise
the network weights.  A little thought should convince the reader that for a deep network, if the
weights are initially too small or too large, one will quickly run into vanishing or exploding gradients.
For fully connected or convolutional networks with standard activation functions, there are analytic
results for choosing a good initialisation.  Without similar results for multiplicative networks, such
as an L-CNN, the best one can do is to choose the initialisation empirically.  Following [100], one
can do this via “layer-sequential unit-variance” initialisation.  The idea is that one starts with some
distribution of weights for each layer, with known standard deviations.  One then proceeds, layer by
layer, changing the standard deviation so that the output of each layer has the same variance as the
previous layer.  In this way, the gradient should not vanish nor explode.  We have implemented this
for all the networks that we discuss.  We find that this is essential for ensuring that deep networks
do not immediately diverge, nor take a long time to begin training.


Training details

For all the networks in this paper, we used stochastic gradient descent together with a preconditioning
of the gradient via the quantum geometric tensor.  In the variational Monte Carlo community, this
is known as stochastic reconfiguration [101,102].  The update rule for the weights      θ of a variational
state|Ψθ⟩ is
                                                 θ→θ−ηG−1∇θEθ,                                                      (4.6)

where η is the learning rate and G−1 is the (pseudo-)inverse of the quantum geometric tensor.  This
tensor (also known as the quantum Fisher matrix) is the metric tensor induced by the Fubini–Study
distance between pure quantum states.  The resulting dynamics is akin to what is known as “natural”
gradient descent in the machine-learning community [103], where   G−1 takes into account that the
space of states has non-trivial geometry [104].  In practice,   G is often ill-conditioned, and so a small
diagonal shift proportional to the identity matrix is often added before inversion.  For large diagonal
shifts, the identity matrix will dominate G, leading to standard stochastic gradient descent with the
Euclidean metric on weight space.  This should still converge to the ground state, though may be
much slower than choosing an optimally small value of the shift.
    In our experiments, the learning rate was initially set to 0.03 and reduced via cosine decay over 500
iterations.  Stochastic reconfiguration was implemented following the “MinSR” algorithm [105,106]
using NetKet’s experimental VMC           SRt driver with a diagonal shift of 10−4.  Double (FP64) precision
was used for all experiments, as we found this led to more stable training of the multiplicative layers
that make up an L-CNN.
    As  discussed  in  [107],  the  variance  of  the  energy  is  useful  for  tracking  the  convergence  of



                                                             28
a  variational  method.11   Given  an  approximate  eigenstate  with  energy E  = ⟨H⟩  and  ∆E  =
√varH =p⟨H2⟩−⟨H⟩2, there will be an exact energy eigenvalue Eexact within ∆E of the energy

E,|E−Eexact|≤ ∆E [109,110].  The variance thus gives an upper bound on how far an approximate
state is from an exact energy eigenstate, and thus can be used as a stopping condition.12  Training
is stopped once the network has converged, which is indicated by Eθ no longer changing and the
variance ofH becoming sufficiently small.13  Upon convergence, the resulting trained network should
then approximate the ground-state wavefunction.


Transfer learning

One of the advantages of computing the wavefunction of a quantum system, rather than using
path-integral  methods  to  compute  observables  directly,  is  the  possibility  of  employing  transfer
learning.  This relies on the fact that on a finite lattice, small changes in the parameters of the
Hamiltonian should lead to only small changes in the ground-state wavefunction.  We exploit this
when performing scans over the coupling:  by starting with the network weights corresponding to a
nearby, previously learned wavefunction, the new NNQS is already relatively close to the sought-for
ground state.  This also helps with stability near to critical values of the of coupling, since the NNQS
starts from a nearby wavefunction (in state space), rather than trying to converge from a generic
state.  We find this form of transfer learning helps the network to converge and greatly decreases
overall training time.
    There is also a second kind of transfer learning that we could take advantage of (though we did
not in our experiments).  Since an L-CNN is a convolutional network, it implements weight sharing
for different lattice sites.  Said differently, the trainable weights in an L-CB layer are encoded in a
rank-three tensor with entries αijk∈ C, where the indices run over the output and input channels.
The number of these channels does not depends on the hyperparameters (Nout,K) for each layer, but
does not depend on the size of the underlying lattice.  This means that one can train an L-CNN on
a small lattice, and then transfer the network weights to an L-CNN for a larger lattice.  Presumably,
this would provide a good starting point for learning the wavefunction on the larger lattice.


Calculating observables

At the end of training, one has a NNQS which approximates the ground-state wavefunction of
the system.  With this in hand, one would like to compute other observables in order to probe
various aspects of its physics.  Unlike the Hamiltonian, general observables do not enjoy the zero-

  11See also [108] for the “V-score”, which can be thought of as a system-size agnostic definition of the accuracy of a
variational state.
  12One might worry that training might become stuck at an excited state, and that the variance cannot be used to
discriminate between this and the true ground state.  Fortunately, stochastic reconfiguration is excellent at driving the
network to the ground state, after which the variance stopping condition can be trusted.
  13In practice, we use the sample variance of Eθ to estimate the variance of H while training.


                                                             29
variance property.  This has important consequences for computing accurate expectation values.
Given an observableO, the variational error⟨O⟩θ−⟨O⟩0 is no longer quadratic in the difference
Ψθ− Ψ0, but changes linearly.  Moreover, the variance varθO =⟨(O−⟨O⟩θ)2⟩θ remains order one
(effectively because the exact ground-state does not have to be an eigenstate ofO).  Thus, the
statistical fluctuations of⟨O⟩θ can be large, requiring many samples to reduce the standard error
in the estimate,  which naively goes as the square root of  varθO/nsamples  modulo the effects of
autocorrelation.

4.3    Hilbert space sector of the NNQS

The ‘t Hooft loop operators along the two one-cycles of the torus are the generators of the Z(1)N
one-form global symmetry and commute with the Hamiltonian.  Therefore, the Hilbert space can
be decomposed into selection sectors based on the eigenvalues of the ‘t Hooft loop operators [111].
Within each sector, the states can be transformed from one to another by acting with contractible
Wilson loop operators comprised of gauge field on links.  This is in contrast to states belonging to
different sectors that cannot be transformed into each other in this manner.  Given our discussion of
ground-state degeneracies in the deconfined phase in Section3.3, one might wonder which sector the
NNQS belongs to.  Is the neural network finding some superposition of the approximately degenerate
ground states?  In fact, as we now show, the network architecture ensures that one is always in
the trivial ‘t Hooft loop sector.  Therefore, the NNQS recovers the true ground states in both the
confined and deconfined phases.  To see this, as we review in AppendixA, recall that the expectation
value of an observableO can be expressed as
                                                                 X                       !
                           ⟨O⟩ =⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩                |Ψ(U)|2         Ψ(U′)               .                            (4.7)
                                     ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩   =XU        ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩      U′  Ψ(U)⟨U|O|U′⟩

The summation over all possible field configurationsU  is usually approximated by sampling using
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The sum overU′ inside the parentheses receives contributions
only from “connected configurations”, that is, configurations where|U⟩ andO|U′⟩ have non-zero
overlap.  In the case whereO = Θx  is a local generator of gauge transformations on the lattice,
there is only one connected configuration, and Ψ(U) and Ψ(U′) must be equal since the network
used to calculate Ψ is gauge invariant by construction.  The expectation value then reduces to an
average of 1’s, giving⟨O⟩ = 1, implying that the wavefunction is gauge invariant.
    A similar argument applies whenO is taken to be any of the ‘t Hooft loop operators that wrap
the torus.  Focusing on N = 2 for concreteness, one hasO∈{Vx,Vy}.  These operators commute
with all contractable Wilson loops, and so they do not change the expectation values of Wilson
loops at all:
                          ⟨U′|W|U′⟩ =⟨U|O†WO|U⟩ =⟨U|O†OW|U⟩ =⟨U|W|U⟩.                           (4.8)


                                                          30
Figure  7:  Expectation  value  of⟨H⟩  for Z2  gauge  theory  (2.2)        on  a  2× 2  lattice  as  a  function
of  coupling g.   The  ground  state  was  computed  using  an  L-CNN  with  six  L-CB  layers  with
hyperparameters (Nout,K) = (3, 1).  The networks were trained for up to 100 iterations with 4096
samples, though they converged within 25 or so iterations.  We trained the networks from larger to
smaller values of the coupling g, using the previously trained network as the starting point.  The
solid teal line is the exact diagonalization result, computed using NetKet.  The inset shows the
fractional difference between the ground state energies calculated using the neural network and
exact diagonalization.


Since  our  variational  wavefunction  Ψ  is  built  from  contractable  Wilson  loops  of  all  sizes,  it  is
invariant under Vx and Vy by construction.  Therefore, we always have (Vx,Vy) = (1, 1), which are
the quantum numbers of the true ground state (and not of the approximately degenerate states).
In  order  to  explore  other  sectors,  one  can  simply  conjugate  the  Hamiltonian  with  appropriate
combinations of the Vx and Vy operators.

5   Z2 gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions

We  now  turn  to  the  study  of Z2  lattice  gauge  theory  in  2 + 1  dimensions  [59,62,93,112               –114].
There are surprisingly few direct numerical studies of the ground state of Z2 lattice gauge theories,
mainly due to the requirement of gauge invariance.  Instead, the literature has focused either on
path-integral Monte Carlo or simulating the dual spin system.  Our focus will be on finding the
ground-state wavefunction itself, allowing us to compute the ground-state energy as a function
of coupling, to identify the critical coupling and the confined-deconfined phases, and to calculate
estimates for the critical exponents that characterise the conformal field theory governing the phase
transition.  We also investigate the potential between two static charges on the lattice.
    As reviewed in [68],     Z2  gauge theory at zero temperature is known to have two phases:  an


                                                            31
ordered (deconfined) phase and a disordered (confined) phase.  These phases are distinguished by
the behaviour of the order and disorder parameters, given by expectation values of Wilson loop and
‘t Hooft string operators. Z2 gauge theory is dual to a classical Ising model in 2 + 1 dimensions, and
therefore the second-order phase transition at gc is in the universality class of the three-dimensional
gauged Ising CFT.
    The  ordered  phase  is  expected  to  appear  for  couplings  below  a  critical  coupling gc,  and  is
characterised by perimeter-law decay for Wilson loops.  The Z(1)2    one-form symmetry is broken in
this phase.  The slow decay of Wilson loops indicates that the ground state of the theory is dominated
by these operators.  One then says that the corresponding electric flux lines are “condensed” and
the theory is deconfined.  Above the critical coupling, the theory is in a disordered phase, with the
Wilson loop expectations following an area-law decay.  The ‘t Hooft string expectations are constant
(independent  of  distance)  due  to  the  condensation  of  magnetic  monopoles.   The Z(1)2    one-form
symmetry is unbroken and the theory is confined.

5.1    Ground-state energies

As a first test of the L-CNN, we compute the ground-state energy of pure Z2 lattice gauge theory in
2 + 1 dimensions.  In Figure7, we plot the expectation value of the lattice Hamiltonian             (2.2)       in the
ground state as a function of coupling g for a 2× 2 lattice.  We see excellent agreement with the
energy calculated by exact diagonalization.
    In Figure8, we plot the ground-state energy per lattice site,    ⟨H⟩/L2, for couplings in the range
g∈ [0.5, 1.1] with lattice sizes L = 2,..., 10.  By eye, one sees that the L = 10 values are likely
already very close to the continuum energy per site and that even relatively small lattices provide
a good estimate, with only L = 2 showing large deviations.  We quantify this further in Figure9,
which shows the difference between the ground-state energy per lattice site for L = 10 and smaller
values of L.  Other than for L = 2, away from g∈ [0.7, 0.8], the estimates agree to better than 10−4
to 10−6.  It is also interesting to observe that the differences are maximised for g≈ 0.76 which, as
we will see, is in the vicinity of the phase transition.

5.2    Searching for the critical point and phase structure

The critical couplinggc for the Z2 gauge theory has not been directly computed previously.  From [34,
Figure 5], the behaviour of the string tension on a 12× 12 lattice suggests gc≈ 0.74.14  However,
this comes from eyeballing the area-law scaling of Wilson loops and is accurate to, at best, one
significant figure.  Later work suggested a transition aroundgc≈ 0.76 from considerations of ‘t Hooft
string expectations and derivatives of the energy [40].  Instead, the most accurate identifications

  14The critical coupling is given in [34] as   h≈ 0.3.  Examining their Hamiltonian, one finds that the h coupling is
related to ours via h1/4there =ghere.


                                                             32
Figure 8:  Expectation value⟨H⟩ for Z2 gauge theory (2.2)       for varying lattice sizes as a function of
coupling g, focused on the region around the critical coupling.  The networks were trained for up
to 2000 iterations with 2048 samples.  Training was stopped early when the variance of the energy
per site stabilised to a value of 1.25× 10−4 or less.  The expectation values were then calculated
using 32× 4096 Monte Carlo samples.  We trained the networks from larger to smaller values of the
coupling g, using the previously trained network as the starting point.
























Figure 9:  The difference between the calculated ground-state energy per lattice site for L = 10 and
varying L, ∆e|L =EL=10/102−EL/L2, as a function of coupling g.  Taking the L = 10 result to
be our “continuum” values, we see that the energies quickly approach this, even for smaller lattice
sizes.


                                                            33
of the critical coupling come from a Monte Carlo analysis of the dual spin system, the quantum
transverse-field Ising model.  The authors of [92] simulate an anisotropic limit of the Ising model on
a 2 + 1-dimensional lattice, equivalent to the two-dimensional quantum transverse-field Ising model
on a square lattice.  Their result is that gc = 0.757051.15
    A  first  attempt  at  locating  the  phase  transition  might  proceed  by  looking  for  signs  of  the
confinement-deconfinement transition using the order parameter of the theory.  Recall that though
the order parameter is the Wilson loop operator, confinement is not cleanly characterised by its
expectation value, but by a change from perimeter- to area-law decay.  Indeed, as can be seen in
Figure10,    ⟨W□⟩ is non-zero for all finite couplings on a finite-size lattice.  Instead, it is the string
tension that displays the usual behaviour of an order parameter – zero in the in the area-law decay
of the loops.  As discussed in Section3.3, given the ground-state wavefunction, the string tension
can be estimated using the Creutz ratio.  In Figure11, we show the string tension     σ estimated using
χ2 on a 10× 10 lattice.  In the small-coupling regime, sufficiently far from the phase transition, the
string tension is zero to within Monte Carlo errors.  As we approach g≈ 0.76, the expected critical
coupling, we see that the string tension becomes non-zero and has approximately linear growth with
coupling.  Using a rough linear fit to this regime, one finds σ(g) =−3.48 + 4.59g.  Extrapolating
back to zero string tension impliesgc≈ 0.758, which is already in good agreement with Monte Carlo
results from the dual spin system.  For larger couplings, g> 0.95, Monte Carlo errors become of the
same order as the quantities appearing in the Creutz ratio, leading to a noisier signal.  Figure11
also shows the string tension estimated using χ3.  Since larger Wilson loops should be less affected
by finite-size corrections, this should give a better estimate of σ, though we also observe that the
signal quickly becomes dominated by Monte Carlo errors in the confined phase.
    Next, we can look for evidence of the phase transition in the disorder parameter, i.e. the ‘t Hooft
string.  In the ordered/deconfined phase, expectation values of these string operators decay with
the distance between the ends of the string, while in the disordered/confined phase, they should be
constant.  In Figure12, we plot the disorder parameter as a function of coupling for monopoles a
distance five apart on a 10× 10 lattice.  We see that below the critical coupling, the expectation
values decays quickly to zero, while near to the transition it grows rapidly, eventually approaching
one.  These results should be compared with those in [40, Figure 11 (b)], which display a similar,
though much noisier, transition.
    At this point, we have demonstrated the presence of confined and deconfined phases, with the
transition occurring at around 0.76.  We would now like to identify the critical couplings more
accurately and to establish whether the transition is first-order or continuous.  We will see that it is
continuous, in agreement with the literature, and then go on to calculate the critical exponents that
characterise the conformal field theory that governs the critical point.


  15Our coupling is related to theirs via t−1/4
                                            there =ghere.



                                                            34
Figure 10:  The lattice average of the single-plaquette Wilson loop operator W□ in Z2 gauge theory
as a function of coupling g near the critical point for varying lattice sizes.  This corresponds to the
expectation value of the magnetic flux energy per site.  The dotted yellow line indicates the position
of the critical coupling at gc = 0.756, as determined by our analysis in Section5.3.























Figure 11:  String tension estimated from the Creutz ratio χl for l = 2, 3 on a 10× 10 lattice using
220≈ 1M Monte Carlo samples.  The error bars shown only take into account Monte Carlo errors.
For g>gc, Wilson loops decay rapidly with size.  Estimates of σ are then challenging due to ratios
of very small numbers, as can be seen from the noisier signal for g> 1 withl = 2 andg> 0.85 with
l = 3.  In particular, above g = 0.9375, the estimates of χ3 are unreliable, with the standard error
becoming larger than the observable.  As such, we have not shown these points.



                                                            35
Figure 12:  The lattice average of the ‘t Hooft string operator in Z2 gauge theory as a function of
coupling g near the critical point for a 10× 10 lattice.  The string operator is of length five in the x
direction.

5.3    Critical exponents and finite-size scaling

The discontinuities and singular behaviour that characterise phase transitions appear only in the
thermodynamic limit, wherein the volume of the system (the lattice size) approaches infinity [115,116].
This is a result of the fact that for finite system size, all calculations involving the ground state
and path integrals are finite and lead to smooth functions.  Away from the critical coupling for the
phase transition, there is an exponential decay of two-point correlation functions as e−r/ξ, where r
is the distance between the operator insertions and ξ is the correlation length.  For continuous phase
transitions, the correlation length diverges as the system approaches the critical pointξ =ξ0|g−gc|−ν
with a positive critical exponent ν > 0.  For a finite-size system of size L, the theory of finite-size
scaling describes how observables behave in the vicinity of the critical point as a function of the
length scale L and the distance from the critical point [117].  The key insight of this theory is
that, close to the critical coupling gc, the correlation length ξ is comparable to the system size and
therefore the microscopic length given by the lattice spacing which governs the range of interaction
no longer affects the correlation functions on scales larger than the lattice spacing.
    The Ising model has a Z2 global symmetry, which corresponds to flipping all the spins on the
lattice.  Recall that in the Ising model, one has to tune the temperature to the critical value T  =Tc
and the external field to zero to obtain the Ising CFT, which inherits this Z2  global symmetry.
Consequently, all operators are either Z2 odd (e.g. the spin fieldσ) or Z2 even (e.g. the energy density
field ϵ) and there are exactly two relevant scalar operators in the CFT [118].  The      Z2-even scalar
with the lowest scaling dimension is the energy density fieldϵ, and its scaling dimension ∆ϵ is related


                                                             36
Figure 13:  Lattice average of the ‘t Hooft string for varying lattice size and distance L/2 between
ends of ‘t Hooft string.  The left figure shows the unscaled expectation values as a function of coupling,
spaced equally over the range g∈ [0.74, 0.78] around the critical coupling.  The right figure shows
curve collapse for the rescaled observable L2β/νT , with the rescaled coupling ˜g =L1/ν(g−gc)/gc.
The critical coupling and exponents are given by gc = 0.7546, β = 0.326 and ν = 0.630.  Note that,
since ˜g depends on L, a fixed range of g values is mapped to a varying range of ˜g values, as can be
seen in the figure.


to the critical exponent ν, which characterises the divergence of the correlation length as T→Tc.
The Z2-odd scalar with the lowest scaling dimension is the spin fieldσ, which transforms asσ→−σ
under the Z2 global symmetry and serves as the order parameter for the Z2 symmetry breaking
phase transition.  The scaling dimension ∆σ  is related to the magnetization critical exponent β,
which characterises the vanishing of magnetization as temperature is increased to the critical value.
Renormalization group (RG) analysis reveals the precise relation between scaling dimensions of
these operators and the critical exponents in d-dimensions [119]:

                                           ν =      1d− ∆ϵ,   β =    ∆σd− ∆ϵ.                                               (5.1)

As Z2 lattice gauge theory can be obtained by gauging the Z2 global symmetry of the Ising model,
the theory at the critical coupling gc is described by the Z2 gauged Ising CFT (Ising∗ CFT). Since
the two theories are related by a discrete gauging, the corresponding scaling dimensions and critical
exponents are identical.  The Z2 odd local operators get projected out during the gauging procedure.
However, the Z2 oddσ field that is attached to the ‘t Hooft string operator remains in the spectrum.
Consequently, the order parameter that we employ to diagnose the confinement phase transition
and compute the critical exponents β  and ν  is the lattice average of the expectation value of a
‘t Hooft string operator.
    The ‘t Hooft string is taken to lie in the x-direction with length L/2, corresponding to one-half
of the lattice size.  This choice numerically leads to the smallest variance and, since the length of



                                                            37
the string operator scales with the system, it ensures that one obtains a line operator in the L→∞
limit.  Since there are two σ fields (monopole operators) at the end of the string operator, the CFT
then predicts that in the vicinity of the critical point the expectation value of the operator should
vary with L as
                                                       ⟨T⟩∼L−2∆σ,                                                            (5.2)

where ∆σ is the scaling dimensions of the σ operator attached to the ‘t Hooft string in the Ising∗
CFT [69].
    Combining this with the finite-size scaling hypothesis, the functional dependence can be expressed
solely in terms of the dimensionless ratio ξ/L and system size L as

                                                  ⟨T⟩ =L−2∆σf(ξ/L),                                                      (5.3)

where f  is an L-independent scaling function.  Using the relations ξ(g)∼|g−gc|−ν  and β/ν = ∆σ,
this can be expressed in terms of g using another scaling function F :

                                            ⟨T⟩ =L−2β/νF L1/ν(g−gc).                                               (5.4)

Thus, plotting L2β/ν⟨T⟩ against ˜g≡L1/ν(g−gc)/gc should give curves that are independent of L
and so “collapse” onto each other.  One can use this curve collapse to fix the values of gc, β and ν
directly from data.  Following the approach of [120], reviewed in AppendixB, one can automate this
by defining a measure of how well the curves collapse and then numerically minimizing the measure
as a function of (gc,β,ν).
    The data for this procedure is generated by finding L-CNNs which approximate the ground-state
wavefunction  for g∈  [0.74, 0.78]  in  steps  of  0.001  and  for  lattice  sizes L  =  4,..., 12,  and  then
computing the lattice average of the expectation value of a ‘t Hooft string of length L/2 in the
x direction.  The raw data is shown in the left plot of Figure13.  We note that these curves do
not collapse on each other for the range of couplings considered.  Following the procedure outlined
in AppendixB, we find the values of     gc, β and ν that provide the best collapse across the range
˜g∈ [−1, 1] for L = 8, 10, 12,16 giving

                              gc = 0.7546(8),   β = 0.326(4),   ν = 0.630(3).                              (5.5)

    Here, the errors are computed by bootstrapping the fits over the original data.  Using these
values, in the right plot of Figure13we show that the curves of      L2β/ν⟨T⟩ do indeed collapse onto
each other as expected.  The collapse for L = 6,..., 12 is excellent.  The collapse holds even for
L = 4, which will have larger corrections in L−1 not captured by the leading-order analysis.  These

  16Since our finite-size scaling ansatz includes only leading-order corrections, we have used only the three largest
lattice sizes to compute the fits – these should be least affected by subleading corrections in the inverse lattice size.

                                                              38
Figure 14:  The left figure shows the linear potential V (r) for Z2 gauge theory between two static
charges on the lattice divided by its expected strong-coupling limit, 2g2r.  The charges are placed at
(0, 0) and (r, 0) forr∈{1,..., 5} on a 10×10 lattice.  The coefficient for eachg is computed by fitting
a linear function with zero intercept.  The right figure shows the potential energy, V (r)≡Eq−E0,
defined as the difference between the ground-state energy without static charges, E0, and the energy
Eq  with charges a distance r apart on a 10× 10 lattice for various values of the coupling.  The
lines are linear fits of the form V (r)∝r.  The r = 0 data corresponds to the state without charges.
From the form of the Hamiltonian (2.2)      , in the strong-coupling limit, one expects the potential to
approach 2g2r, so we have divided by 2g2 to see this.  We have also plotted this behaviour as the
dashed diagonal black line.  In all cases, after inserting the static charges, the networks were trained
for a further 200 iterations before computing⟨W†rHWr⟩θ (though we observed negligible difference
between this and using the untwisted sector ground state).


results predict that the conformal dimensions of theσ andϵ primary operators in the critical 2 + 1-d
Ising model are ∆σ = 0.518(4) and ∆ϵ = 1.412(8).
    We can compare our results with previous calculations of the critical exponents.  Since the scaling
dimensions of operators are identical for Ising and Ising∗ CFT, our results should match the ones
computed for all systems in the Ising universality class.  The three principal theoretical methods of
computing critical exponents are Monte Carlo study of lattice systems, perturbative RG flow and
the conformal bootstrap.  The conformal bootstrap computations are the most precise, but all three
techniques are in agreement with each other.  From the conformal bootstrap program, state-of-the-art
bounds on conformal dimensions yield ∆σ = 0.5181489(10) and ∆ϵ = 1.412625(10) [121,122], which
in turn fix
                                   βCB = 0.326419(3),   νCB = 0.629971(4).                                    (5.6)

The most precise Monte Carlo results for exponents of the 2 + 1-d Ising model are due to Ferrenberg
et al. [123],  extending previous results of Hasenbusch [124],  leading to      νMC  = 0.62960(15) and
βMC = 0.32620(31).
    These results are summarised in Table2.  We see that our estimates for    β and ν are in excellent
agreement  with high-precision  conformal  bootstrap  and  Monte Carlo  values.  The value  of  the


                                                            39
critical coupling determined by our scaling collapse analysis, gc  = 0.7546(8), is within the 95%
confidence interval (two standard deviations) of the value gc = 0.757051 determined by Monte Carlo
calculations [92].  This small deviation can be attributed to the corrections from irrelevant operators
in the conformal field theory, which shift the computed value of the critical coupling from the exact
value.  It is also important to note that our analysis considers only the leading-order effects in the
inverse lattice size L−1, whereas the Monte Carlo results incorporate subleading corrections, which
may further explain the discrepancy in the values of gc.

                                        Method           ν         β
                                         NNQS                       0.630(3)         0.326(4)
                            Conformal Bootstrap [122]    0.629971(4)    0.326419(3)
                                 Monte Carlo [125]           0.62960(15)    0.32620(31)
                                  ϵ expansion [126]            0.6305(25)      0.3265(15)
                                    Large N  [126]               0.6304(13)      0.3258(14)

            Table 2:  Selected theoretical determinations of 2 + 1-d Ising critical exponents.



Critical coupling from BST extrapolation

So far, we have seen that both the order and disorder parameters display changes in behaviour in
the vicinity of critical coupling predicted by Monte Carlo studies of the dual spin system, and that
curve collapse can be used to identify the critical coupling and exponents.  Here, we provide an
alternative estimate for the critical coupling directly from our results.
    Our curve collapse approach relied on the leading-order corrections from finite-size scaling theory.
In  fact,  one  can  do  better  than  this  by  taking  into  account  subleading  corrections  in L−1  and
extrapolating to the continuum limit.  One way to do this is via BST extrapolation [41 –43],  a
technique which uses rational functions to accelerate convergence.  In practice, one looks at the
pairs (L,gcross), where the coupling gcross is where the curve for lattice size L and the next largest
lattice size cross.  One then follows an iterative procedure to find the continuum critical coupling, as
outlined in AppendixC.
    Applying this to the crossing points of⟨T⟩ for a ‘t Hooft string operator of length L/2 gives the
estimate17
                                                      gc = 0.756431,                                                           (5.7)

where the error solely due to convergence of the BST procedure is negligible.  This is slightly larger
than the coupling we found via curve collapse, though a small difference is not surprising – curve
collapse considers only leading-order corrections in L−1 while BST extrapolation can also account


  17The error solely from BST extrapolation can be estimated from ε(0)                         )       ).  The optimal choice of
                                                                           N−1 (see Equation (C.6
ω leads to ε(0)N−1∼ 10−11, implying that the extrapolation has converged well.


                                                              40
for higher-order corrections, including an L-dependent shift of gc.

5.4    Potential energy between charges

By using the ground-state wavefunctions obtained after training, we can compute the expectation
value of the Wilson string to find the potential between charges on the lattice.  Since the gauge
group is Z2, the possible charges are{0, 1}.  The Wilson string stretching between two non-zero
charges lying along the x direction of length r is simply a product of Z (clock) operators

                                           Wr =Zx,µZx+ˆx,µ...Zx+rˆx,µ.                                                (5.8)

At small couplings g≪ 1, the theory is deconfined and the potential per unit length of the Wilson
string vanishes.  On the other hand, for large values of the coupling, the potential energy can be
obtained by setting N = 2 in (2.20):

                                            ⟨W†rHWr⟩0−⟨H⟩0 = 2g2r.                                                 (5.9)

The expected linear dependence of the potential energy as a function of the distance between charges
is confirmed on the right plot in Figure14.  The potential energy per unit length increases rapidly
near the phase transition and saturates to 2g2 at strong coupling, as can be seen from the left plot
of Figure14.

6   Z3 gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions

We now turn to studying Z3  gauge theory.  This theory is expected to have a first-order phase
transition separating the deconfined and confined phase [59,127].  For a first-order transition, the
spectral gap does not vanish even in the thermodynamic limit, and therefore the correlation length
is always finite.  Since the ground state of the system changes abruptly at the point of transition,
physical observables such as the energy and its derivatives as a function of coupling display kinks or
discontinuities.  For finite lattice sizes, the ordered and disordered phases coexist, smoothing out
these features.
    By computing the energy and its derivatives, we can determine the critical coupling gc at which
the transition occurs.  The computation of other observables such as the Creutz ratio, ‘t Hooft string
operator and the potential energy between charges provides insight into the deconfined and confined
phases.  The theory is in a deconfined phase below the critical coupling, with perimeter-law decay
for Wilson loops and a broken Z(1)3    one-form symmetry.  In the confined phase, the Wilson loops
obey an area-law decay and the Z(1)3    one-form symmetry is preserved.  As with Z2, the expectation
value of the ‘t Hooft string operators become constant due to condensation of magnetic monopoles.


                                                            41
Figure 15:  Expectation value of⟨H⟩ for Z3  gauge theory  (2.2)       on a 2× 2 lattice as a function
of  coupling g.   The  ground  state  was  computed  using  an  L-CNN  with  six  L-CB  layers  with
(Nout,K) = (3, 1).  The networks were trained for up to 100 iterations with 4096 samples.  We
trained the networks from larger to smaller values of the coupling g, using the previously trained
network as the starting point.  The solid teal line is the exact diagonalization result, computed using
NetKet.  The inset shows the fractional difference between the ground state energies calculated
using the neural network and exact diagonalization.

6.1    Ground-state energies

As a test of our approach, we compare it with previous work using tensor networks to numerically
investigate the ground state of a pure Z3 lattice gauge theory in 2 + 1 dimensions [58].  In Figure15,
we plot the expectation value of the lattice Hamiltonian (2.2)       in the ground state, i.e. the ground
state energy, as a function of coupling g for a 2× 2 lattice.  We see excellent agreement with the
energy calculated by exact diagonalization,  and find more accurate results than those recently
obtained using tensor networks [58].
    In Figure16, we show the ground-state energy on lattices of size      L∈{2, 4, 6, 8, 10} as a function
of coupling in the region g∈ [0.5, 1.1].  Compared with the results for Z2 in Figure8, the curves for
Z3 appear to be somewhat sharper at the transition around g≈ 0.8.  As we will see in a moment,
this can can be seen more clearly by computing the derivative of the energy with respect to the
coupling.

6.2    First-order phase transition

The  zero-temperature Z3  theory  is  expected  to  undergo  a  first-order  phase  transition  at  some
critical coupling gc.  There are few works in the literature which determine this coupling directly
from the gauge theory.  From [58, Figure 7], the behaviour of the string tension on a 6  × 6 lattice


                                                            42
Figure 16:  Expectation value⟨H⟩ for Z3  gauge theory for varying lattice sizes as a function of
coupling g, focused on the region around the critical coupling.  The networks were constructed
from⌈log2Nsites⌉ L-CB layers with (Nout,K) = (4, 2), and trained for up to 1000 iterations with
4096 samples.  Training was stopped early when the variance of the energy per site stabilised to a
value of 1.25× 10−4 or less.  The expectation values were then calculated using 32× 4096 Monte
Carlo samples.  We trained the networks from larger to smaller values of the coupling g, using the
previously trained network as the starting point.


suggests gc∈ [0.75, 0.90].  However, the string tension data is rather noisy, and the authors do not
give an explicit estimate of gc.  A somewhat cleaner calculation is given in [128] using an infinite
projected entangled-pair state (iPEPS) ansatz.  The ground-state energy displays a kink at the
critical coupling, and a fit to the area-law coefficient agrees with the location of the kink, giving
gc = 0.818.18
    Before locating the critical coupling, we first look for evidence of the confined and deconfined
phases.  Following a similar discussion in Section5, in Figure17, we plot an estimate of the string
tension, computed using the Creutz ratio for l = 2.  At small couplings, the string tension is zero,
indicating the presence of an ordered, deconfined phase.  At larger couplings, the string tension is
non-zero and increasing with coupling, corresponding to a disordered, confined phase.  The phase
transition appears to occur in the regiong∈ [0.7755, 0.7875].  For completeness, we also compute the
lattice average of the disorder operator, i.e. the ‘t Hooft string.  As for Z2, one expects this operator
to decay exponentially with the string length in the ordered phase, while it should be independent
of length (but coupling dependent) in the disordered phase.  Our results in Figure18confirm these

  18The  critical  coupling  is  given  in  [128]  as   g2c  =  1.159.   However,  their  Hamiltonian  is  not  the  same  as  ours.
Specifically, working in a basis where the shift operator is diagonal, they have resummed the electric term in the
Hamiltonian and absorbed various constants into the coupling.  This results in the identifications g2there =√3g2here and
√3Hthere(gthere) =Hhere(ghere)−g−2
                                      hereL2.


                                                              43
Figure 17:  String tension estimated from Creutz ratioχl forl = 2 on a 10×10 lattice using 220≈ 1M
Monte Carlo samples.  For g>gc, Wilson loops decay rapidly with size.  Estimates of σ are then
challenging due to ratios of very small numbers, as can be seen around g> 0.95.


expectations, with the transition region agreeing with that suggested by the string tension.
    Note that one would expect a first-order transition to be signalled by discontinuities in order
and disorder parameters.  For the ‘t Hooft string, the Z3 theory displays a steeper increase than Z2
at the transition, however it does not display clear signs of a discontinuity.  In fact, this behaviour
is not unexpected, and is often referred to as being “weakly” first order.  First-order transitions
are referred to as weakly first order when the (finite) correlation length at the transition is larger
than the system size.  If the lattice system is smaller than the correlation length ξ, it is difficult
to differentiate between first-order and continuous transitions, with the expected discontinuities
smoothed out, the critical coupling shifted, and finite-size scaling analysis failing to recover trivial
critical exponents (i.e. ν = 1/d) [129].        19  Indeed, it is known that the spin system dual to Z3 gauge
theory, the three-state Potts model, has a correlation length ξ∼ 10 [131], and so we may need to
look at larger lattices to see a clear signal of first-order behaviour.
    A first-order quantum phase transition can also be diagnosed by a discontinuity in the first
derivative of the energy with respect to the coupling [128].  Using the Hellmann–Feynman theorem,
this derivative can be calculated as
                                    ∂⟨H⟩θ        ∂H

                                     ∂g2 ≡         ∂g2    θ =g−2⟨Ψθ|HE−HB|Ψθ⟩.                                    (6.1)

  19For example, the correlation lengths of the two-dimensional q-state Potts model were computed by Buffenoir and
Wallon [130].  The theory has a continuous   ξ→∞) transition forq = 4, and a first-order transition forq≥ 5.  However,
for q = 5,... the correlation lengths ξ≈ 2500, 150, 50, 25, 15, 10,... indicate that one will not see discontinuities in
observables for smaller values of q without going to very large lattices.



                                                              44
Figure 18:  The lattice average of the ‘t Hooft string operator in Z3 gauge theory as a function of
coupling g near the critical point for a 10× 10 lattice.  The string operator is of length five in the x
direction.  The dotted yellow line indicates our identification of the transition at gc = 0.781.






















Figure 19:  The left figure shows various expectation values per lattice site for Z2  gauge theory
computed  on  a  10× 10  lattice  using  an  L-CNN  as  a  function  of  coupling.   These  include  the
ground-state energy, the electric and magnetic energies, and the derivative of the energy with respect
to g2.  We have also labeled the position of the critical coupling gc = 0.756 with a dashed gold line
as calculated from BST extrapolation in Section5.3.  The right figure shows the same data for              Z3
gauge theory, with the transition marked midway between 0.775 and 0.7875 at gc = 0.781.




                                                             45
In Figure19, we plot the derivative of the energy per lattice site as a function of coupling for both            Z2
and Z3 on a 10× 10 lattice.  In the case of Z2, which is known to have a continuous phase transition,
the transition region near to the critical coupling (gc≈ 0.756) shows a smooth decrease.  For Z3,
the derivative instead shows a steep decrease in the region [0.775, 0.7875], indicating a first-order
transition.  This is also apparent in the curves for⟨HB⟩, the magnetic term in the Hamiltonian,
which display a sharper, more sudden increase for Z3.20  From this, and the order and disorder
parameters, we identify the critical coupling to be

                                                      gc = 0.781(6).                                                            (6.2)

where the error corresponds to the half-width of the interval [0.775, 0.7875].  If one plots the same
expectations for varying lattice size, one sees that the curve for Z2 does not change much between
L = 6 and L = 10, suggesting that it is not becoming discontinuous in the continuum limit.  The
curves for Z3 instead show the pattern of getting steeper and steeper with increasing L, exactly as
one would expect for a first-order phase transition.
    We can also check whether our variational state has correctly learned the symmetries of the
ground state.  For example, we know that the true ground state should be invariant under lattice
translations, rotations and reflections, and charge conjugation. L-CNNs are manifestly translationally
invariant,  so this symmetry is exact.  The remaining symmetries will be learned as part of the
training process, and so they will approximate.  One can check this by comparing the amplitude Ψ(U)
with Ψ(U′), whereU′ is related toU  by one of the symmetry transformations.  For example, charge
conjugation acts by sending all link variables to their conjugates,U′ =U†.  Charge conjugation
invariance then implies that expectation values of Wilson loops for the ground state should be real.21
Denoting the charge conjugation operator by C, this follows from

                                          ⟨W⟩0 =⟨Ψ0|C†WC|Ψ0⟩ =⟨W⟩†0,                                             (6.3)

where we have used C|Ψ0⟩ =|Ψ0⟩ for the ground state.  Again, we can check to what accuracy
this holds for our trained networks by comparing the size of the imaginary part of the expectation
value with its magnitude.  On a 10× 10 lattice, evaluating the lattice average of the single-plaquette
Wilson loop operator for our NNQSs with 218≈ 250k samples gives values of im⟨W□⟩θ/|⟨W□⟩θ| in
the range 10−6 to 10−4 forg∈ [0.5, 1.1].  From this, we conclude that our networks have learned the
charge conjugation symmetry to high accuracy.

  20Note that HB/L2  is effectively one minus the single-plaquette Wilson loop W□,  so we have not plotted this
separately.
  21In fact, since the Hamiltonian commutes with time reversal, if the ground-state is unique, one can always pick the
ground-state to be real (see, for instance, [132, Equation 6.4]).  Then, if it is also charge-conjugation invariant, one
also has Ψ(U) = Ψ(U†).  This symmetry could be imposed in the network architecture, though we have not done so in
this work.


                                                             46
Figure 20:  The left figure shows the linear potential V (r) for Z3 gauge theory between two static
charges on the lattice divided by its expected strong-coupling limit,  32g2.  The charges are placed at
(0, 0) and (r, 0) forr∈{1,..., 5} on a 10×10 lattice.  The coefficient for eachg is computed by fitting
a linear function with zero intercept.  The right figure shows the potential energy, V (r)≡Eq−E0,
defined as the difference between the ground-state energy without static charges, E0, and the energy
Eq  with charges a distance r apart on a 10× 10 lattice for various values of the coupling.  The
lines are linear fits of the form V (r)∝r.  The r = 0 data corresponds to the state without charges.
From the form of the Hamiltonian (2.2)      , in the strong-coupling limit, one expects the potential to
approach  32g2r, so we have divided by  32g2 to see this.  We have also plotted this behaviour as the
dashed diagonal black line.  In all cases, after inserting the static charges, the networks were trained
for a further 200 iterations before computing⟨W†rHWr⟩.

6.3    Static charges

Finally,  we  turn  to  the  potential  between  static  charges  in  the Z3  theory,  computed  using  the
expectation value of the Hamiltonian conjugated by a Wilson string.  In this case, the possible
charges are{0, 1, 2} and thus there are two distinct Wilson strings.  The following Wilson string
operator places the charges 1 at x and 2 at x +rˆx, a distance r apart along the x-direction:

                                            Wr =Qx,µQx+ˆx,µ...Qx+rˆx,µ.                                               (6.4)

The square of this operator W 2r  =W†r  places charges 2 atx and 1 atx +rˆx, so the potential energy
associated to it is identical to that of Wr.
    The theory is deconfined at very small values of the coupling, and so the potential per unit length
should vanish.  Since there is a first-order phase transition for Z3, the potential energy per unit
distance should increase drastically near the phase transition, with this behaviour becoming singular
in the thermodynamic limit.  For very large values of g, the potential energy can be estimated by
setting N = 3 in (2.20)
                                        V (r)≈⟨W†rHWr⟩0−⟨H⟩0 = 32g2r.                                           (6.5)




                                                             47
The dramatic increase in the potential at the phase transition and the predicted weak-/strong-
coupling behaviour is demonstrated in the left plot of Figure20, while the linear dependence of the
potential energy on the distance between charges is illustrated in the right plot.  Comparing these
with the analogous results for Z2 in Figure14, we see that both display potentials that increase
linearly with distance, with the increase at the phase transition being smooth for Z2  and much
sharper for Z3, in agreement with their continuous and first-order nature respectively.

Acknowledgements

We thank Miranda Cheng, Edward Mazenc, Matija Medvidovi´c and Semon Rezchikov for stimulating
discussions and useful insights, and Filippo Vicentini for patiently answering the authors’ questions
about NetKet.  The work of A. Apte is supported by the Data Science Institute at the University of
Chicago.  A. Ashmore is supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 838776, and acknowledges previous
support from NSF Grant PHY-2014195 and the Kadanoff Center for Theoretical Physics.  Part
of this work was carried out at the Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by NSF grant
PHY-2210452.  C. C´ordova is partially supported by the US Department of Energy Grant 5-29073
and the Sloan Foundation.  C. C´ordova and T.-C. Huang also acknowledge support from the Simons
Collaboration on Global Categorical Symmetries.  We are grateful to the University of Chicago’s
Research Computing Center and AI+Science Research Initiative for assistance with the calculations
carried out in this work.

A    Implementation of Wilson loop operators

In  NetKet,  Wilson  loop  operators  can  be  constructed  either  by  chaining  together  products  of
LocalOperator’s, or by constructing a custom operator.  The first approach often runs into memory
problems,  as  large  Wilson  loops  need  products  of  many  local  operators  (e.g.  an  8× 8  Wilson
loop will need a product of 32 local operators).  Instead, we constructed a custom operator.  The
implementation is simplified by the fact that we are interested only in the expectation value of
the  Wilson  loop  operators,  and  not  in  their  gradients  with  respect  to  the  network  parameters
(which would require a more complicated implementation).  Given a state|Ψ⟩, one can compute the
expectation value of an operatorO via
                                                   X                        !
             ⟨O⟩ =⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩               |Ψ(U)|2          ⟨U|O|U′⟩⟨U′|Ψ⟩        = EU∼|Ψ(U)|2Oloc(U),         (A.1)
                       ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩   =XU       ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩       U′        ⟨U|Ψ⟩







                                                          48
whereU  andU′ are gauge field configurations, EU∼|Ψ(U)|2  means take the expectation value overU,
withU  distributed according to the PDF|Ψ(U)|2, and we have defined the “local estimator”

                     Oloc(U) =⟨U|O|Ψ⟩                 ⟨U|O|U′⟩⟨U′|Ψ⟩             ⟨U|O|U′⟩Ψ(U′)
                                    ⟨U|Ψ⟩   =XU′            ⟨U|Ψ⟩         =XU′               Ψ(U).                   (A.2)

In order to evaluate this expectation value via variational Monte Carlo, one needs the following:

   1.  Some way of restricting the sum overU  to finitely many representative values by sampling the
       PDF,|Ψ(U)|2.  This is provided by the Monte Carlo variational state interface of NetKet.

   2.  A method to take the samples{U} and compute the “connected elements”, i.e. those for which
       the matrix element⟨U|O|U′⟩̸= 0 is non-zero.  This means that for eachU, one does not have
       to sum over all of the sampled configurations again, but can instead restrict to a (usually
       much) smaller set of configurations, labeled by{U′}.  One then also needs to compute the
       matrix elements themselves.

   3.  A calculation of the local estimatorsOloc(U) given the matrix elements, the sets{U} and
       {U′}, and the state|Ψ⟩.  Again, this implementation is provided by NetKet.

   4.The statistical average of the local energies weighted by |Ψ(U)|2.

For a single clock operator Ql, it is simple to find the connected elements{U′} and the matrix
elements⟨U|O|U′⟩.  Given a configuration of link variables|U⟩ =|q⟩1⊗···⊗|q⟩l⊗...  on the lattice,
Ql acts as
                                                Ql|U⟩ = e2πiql/N|U⟩.                                                      (A.3)

Since we are working in a basis which diagonalises the action of Ql, this preserves the configuration
up to a phase, so that the connected set{U′} has only one element, namelyU  itself.  That is

                                             ⟨U′|Ql|U⟩ = e2πiql/NδU,U′.                                                  (A.4)

The same holds for products of clock operators, such as those used for constructing Wilson loop
operators.  Using this, it is relatively straightforward to implement a custom Wilson loop operator
in NetKet.

B    Exponents from data collapse

Finite-size scaling is one of the key pillars in the theory of critical phenomena [133].  Consider a
system of characteristic length scale L close to the critical point gc.  The behaviour of a physical




                                                           49
quantity m in the vicinity of the transition can be captured by a scaling relation [134]

                                                 m(t,L) =Ldf(t/Lc),                                                     (B.1)

wheret = (g−gc)/gc is the reduced coupling, and depending on the physical system m may refer to
quantities such as specific heat, magnetization, or in our case the expectation value of the ‘t Hooft
string operator.  The remarkable aspect of this relation is that it holds for different physical systems
in the same universality class.  The scaling relation predicts that when the data for mL−d is plotted
against tL−c, the curves for different system sizes (and even for different materials belonging to
the same universality class) should collapse onto a single curve.  See, for example, the first figure
in [133] for a striking illustration of curve collapse in magnetization data for five different materials
belonging to the 2 + 1-d Heisenberg universality class.
    The scaling relation can be used to extract the values of the exponents c and d, and the critical
coupling gc based on numerical data for m(t,L).  Given a measure for the data collapse, numerical
minimization techniques can be used to automatically search for the exponents.  Consider a collection
of data for a set of lengths{Lj}.  The tabulated values of m and t can be represented as{mij} and
{tij} respectively, where ij labels the i’th value of t for length Lj.  The central obstacle to overcome
in defining a measure of collapse is the absence of the knowledge of the scaling function f.  Closely
following [120], we can use a polynomial interpolation based on any length   Lp∈{Lj} to determine
f  and compute the deviation from this curve.  Since any length can be used for this purpose, we
repeat the procedure for all lengths and average to obtain a measure of collapse:
                                                        X    XmijL−dj −Ep(tijL−cj  ),                               (B.2)
                                P (c,d,gc) =     1Nover
                                                          p   i,j

whereEp(x) is the interpolation function based on Lp.  The sum over i is performed only in the
overlapping region to avoid extrapolation, and Nover is the total number of points used to compute
P .   We  use  a  cubic  spline  interpolation  scheme  to  findEp(x).   Since P ≥  0  and  vanishes  only
for  perfect  data  collapse,  minimization  of P  can  be  used  to  extract  the  optimal  values  of  the
parameters.  Since each of the terms that appears in the sum is non-negative, we can use the method
of  least-squares  [135]  to  compute  the  optimal  values  of  (   c,d,gc)  that  lead  to  the  best-fit.   The
uncertainties in the computed values are estimated by using statistical bootstrapping [136], wherein
the computation of optimal parameters is carried out multiple times using data that is re-sampled
from the original dataset.  This method of computing uncertainties in critical exponents is routinely
employed in the Monte Carlo simulations of statistical systems [47,137].







                                                              50
C    BST extrapolation

Finite-size scaling analysis has long been used to extrapolate finite-size lattice data to the thermody-
namic limit,L→∞.  In this appendix, we give a brief review of one such technique for extrapolating
a sequence of finite-size data which empirically has been found to converge rapidly.  This is known
as BST extrapolation [41–43].
    The general set-up is as follows.  Certain continuum observables, such as the critical coupling gc,
admit an asymptotic form

                                      gc(L) =gc +a1L−ω1 +a2L−ω2 +...,                                         (C.1)

where gc(L) is computed via a finite lattice simulation and gc is the continuum critical coupling
that one is interested in predicting to high accuracy.
    Let hi, i = 0,...,N, denote a sequence of positive numbers which converges to zero for i→∞.
In practice, one often takes the hi to be given by the inverse lattice size.  As an example, consider
even lattices withhi = (1/2, 1/4, 1/6, 1/8) withN = 3 andi = 0,..., 3.  Assume that the continuum
observable of interest is T , which has a finite-size expansion

                                         T (h) =T +a1hω1 +a2hω2 +...,                                            (C.2)

where ω2>ω1, and so on.  One then computes the following quantities

                          m = 0 T (0)0       T (1)0       T (2)0       T (3)0
                          m = 1      T (0)1       T (1)1       T (2)1
                          m = 2          T (0)2       T (1)2
                          m = 3              T (0)3

using the iterative rules

               T (i)−1 = 0,
               T (i)0   =T (hi),                                                                                     (C.3)
                                                      "  hi       ω                            !       #−1
               T (i)m  =T (i+1)                                        1− T (i+1)m−1 −T (i)m−1    − 1      ,
                         m−1  + (T (i+1)m−1 −T (i)m−1)     hi+m             T (i+1)
                                                                              m−1 −T (i+1)m−2

where  the  final  line  is  evaluated  for m≥  1.   These  rules  come  from  approximating T (h)  via  a
sequence of rational functions.
    The point of this is that the original sequence of finite-size data T (i)0    is expected to converge
slowly to the continuum limit, with T (3)0    in our example being the best estimate that one can obtain
from the four lattice sizes considered.  Comparing with the expansion of T (h) in (C.2)       , this estimate


                                                            51
obeys
                                                  T (3)0    =T +O(hω13  ).                                                      (C.4)

Using the rules above to calculate them = 1 row, our new best estimate will beT (2)1   .  It then follows
straightforwardly from the form of (C.3) that, upon picking  ω =ω1, this estimate obeys

                                                   T (2)1    =T +O(hη2),                                                       (C.5)

where η = min(ω2, 2ω1).  Provided that the hi  are chosen appropriately (i.e. close enough), this
correction term will be smaller than the naive one in (C.4)       .  In other words, in one step of the BST
algorithm, one can remove the leading-order correction in T (h).  One then iterates to eventually
find T (0)3   , which gives the “best” estimate of T .
    It then remains to choose an appropriate value of ω given the data T (hi).  In practice, this is
done by calculating
                                                 ε(i)m  = 2|T (i+1)m  −T (i)m|.                                                    (C.6)

Taking i  =  0  and m  = N− 1, ε(0)N−1  measures  the  difference  between  the  extrapolants  in  the
penultimate row.  One should then choose ω to minimise this quantity.  The idea behind this is
that, in the N→∞ limit of many data points, one expects|T (i)m −T|≤ε(i)m , and so minimizing the
difference between the penultimate estimates will lead to a prediction T (0)N   for T  with the smallest
extrapolation error.

References

   [1]K. G. Wilson, “Confinement of Quarks”,      Phys. Rev. D 10 (1974)2445–2459.

   [2]  J. B. Kogut and L. Susskind, “Hamiltonian Formulation of Wilson’s Lattice Gauge Theories”,
       Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975)395–408.

   [3]F. Wilczek, “QCD made simple”,      Physics Today 53 8, (2000)22–28.

   [4]W. Greiner, S. Schramm, and S. Eckart,      Quantum Chromodynamics.  Springer, 3 ed., 2006.

   [5]  J. Greensite, An Introduction to the Confinement Problem.  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.

   [6]Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, “Dynamical Model of Elementary Particles Based on an
       Analogy with Superconductivity. 1.”, Phys. Rev. 122 (1961)345–358.

   [7]Y. Nambu and G. Jona-Lasinio, “Dynamical model of elementary particles based on an
       analogy with superconductivity. II.”, Phys. Rev. 124 (1961)246–254.

   [8]C. Rebbi,     Lattice Gauge Theories and Monte Carlo Simulations.  World Scientific, 1983.

                                                             52
 [9]  Z. Fodor and S. D. Katz, “Lattice determination of the critical point of QCD at finite T and
     mu”, JHEP 03 (2002)014,                  arXiv:hep-lat/0106002.

[10]  BMW Collaboration, S. Durr et al., “Ab-Initio Determination of Light Hadron Masses”,
     Science 322 (2008)1224–1227,                             arXiv:0906.3599  [hep-lat].

[11]Y. Zhang, T. Grover, and A. Vishwanath, “Topological entanglement entropy of z2 spin
     liquids and lattice Laughlin states”, Phys. Rev. B 84 (2011)075128,                       arXiv:1106.0015
     [cond-mat.str-el].

[12]J. McMinis and N. M. Tubman, “Renyi entropy of the interacting Fermi liquid”,        Phys. Rev.
     B 87 (2013)081108,                       arXiv:1207.4188  [cond-mat.str-el].

[13]Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning”,       Nature 521 7553, (2015)436–444.

[14]G. Carleo and M. Troyer, “Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural
     networks”, Science 355 6325, (2017)602–606,                         arXiv:1606.02318  [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[15]E. K. P. Chong and S. H. Zak,       An Introduction to Optimization.  Wiley Series in Discrete
     Mathematics and Optimization. John Wiley & Sons, 4 ed., 2013.

[16]  A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, A. A. Radul, and J. M. Siskind, “Automatic differentiation
     in machine learning:  a survey”, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18 153, (2018)1–43,                   arXiv:1502.05767
     [cs.SC].

[17]D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning representations by
     back-propagating errors”, Nature 323 6088, (1986)533–536.

[18]  M. B. Hastings, “An area law for one-dimensional quantum systems”, J. Stat. Mech.:  Theory
     Exp. 2007 08, (2007)P08024–P08024.

[19]G. Cybenko, “Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function”,        Math. Control
     Signals Syst. 2 4, (1989)303–314.

[20]Z. Denis, A. Sinibaldi, and G. Carleo, “Comment on ‘Can Neural Quantum States Learn
     Volume-Law Ground States?’”, arXiv:2309.11534  [quant-ph].

[21]J. Chen, S. Cheng, H. Xie, L. Wang, and T. Xiang, “Equivalence of restricted boltzmann
     machines and tensor network states”, Phys. Rev. B 97 8, (2018)085104,                       arXiv:1701.04831
     [cond-mat.str-el].

[22]  O. Sharir, A. Shashua, and G. Carleo, “Neural tensor contractions and the expressive power
     of deep neural quantum states”, Phys. Rev. B 106 20, (2022)205136,                       arXiv:2103.10293
     [quant-ph].

                                                          53
[23]S. Weinzierl, “Introduction to Monte Carlo methods”,       arXiv:hep-ph/0006269.

[24]Y. Nomura, N. Yoshioka, and F. Nori, “Purifying deep Boltzmann machines for thermal
     quantum states”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 (2021)060601,                       arXiv:2103.04791
     [cond-mat.str-el].

[25]H. Lange, A. Van de Walle, A. Abedinnia, and A. Bohrdt, “From Architectures to
     Applications:  A Review of Neural Quantum States”, arXiv:2402.09402
     [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[26]  M. Medvidovi´c and J. R. Moreno, “Neural-network quantum states for many-body physics”,
     arXiv:2402.11014  [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[27]M. Favoni, A. Ipp, D. I. M¨uller, and D. Schuh, “Lattice Gauge Equivariant Convolutional
     Neural Networks”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 3, (2022)032003,                       arXiv:2012.12901  [hep-lat].

[28]M. Favoni, A. Ipp, D. I. M¨uller, and D. Schuh, “Lattice Gauge Symmetry in Neural
     Networks”, PoS LATTICE2021 (2022)185,                  arXiv:2111.04389  [hep-lat].

[29]M. Favoni, A. Ipp, D. I. M¨uller, and D. Schuh, “Preserving gauge invariance in neural
     networks”, EPJ Web Conf. 258 (2022)09004,                     arXiv:2112.11239  [hep-lat].

[30]M. Favoni, A. Ipp, and D. I. M¨uller, “Applications of Lattice Gauge Equivariant Neural
     Networks”, EPJ Web Conf. 274 (2022)09001,                     arXiv:2212.00832  [hep-lat].

[31]J. Aronsson, D. I. M¨uller, and D. Schuh, “Geometrical aspects of lattice gauge equivariant
     convolutional neural networks”, arXiv:2303.11448  [hep-lat].

[32]U. Wenger, K. Holland, A. Ipp, and D. I. M¨uller, “Fixed point actions from convolutional
     neural networks”, PoS LATTICE2023 (2024)038,                  arXiv:2311.17816  [hep-lat].

[33]K. Holland, A. Ipp, D. I. M¨uller, and U. Wenger, “Machine learning a fixed point action for
     SU(3) gauge theory with a gauge equivariant convolutional neural network”,
     arXiv:2401.06481  [hep-lat].

[34]D. Luo, G. Carleo, B. K. Clark, and J. Stokes, “Gauge Equivariant Neural Networks for
     Quantum Lattice Gauge Theories”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 27, (2021)276402,
     arXiv:2012.05232  [cond-mat.str-el].

[35]  D. Luo, S. Yuan, J. Stokes, and B. K. Clark, “Gauge Equivariant Neural Networks for 2+1D
     U(1) Gauge Theory Simulations in Hamiltonian Formulation”, arXiv:2211.03198
     [hep-lat].



                                                         54
[36]F. Vicentini       et al., “NetKet 3:  Machine Learning Toolbox for Many-Body Quantum
     Systems”, SciPost Phys. Codeb. 2022 (2022)7,              arXiv:2112.10526  [quant-ph].

[37]J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula,
     A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, “JAX: composable
     transformations of Python + NumPy programs.” https://github.com/google/jax.

[38]D. Boyda       et al., “Applications of Machine Learning to Lattice Quantum Field Theory”, in
     Snowmass 2021.  2022.  arXiv:2202.05838  [hep-lat].

[39]S. Bulusu, M. Favoni, A. Ipp, D. I. M¨uller, and D. Schuh, “Generalization capabilities of
     translationally equivariant neural networks”, Phys. Rev. D 104 7, (2021)074504,
     arXiv:2103.14686  [hep-lat].

[40]  D. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Hu, Z. Zhao, V. M. Hur, and B. K. Clark, “Gauge Invariant and Anyonic
     Symmetric Autoregressive Neural Networks for Quantum Lattice Models”, Phys. Rev. Res. 5
     (2023)013216,                       arXiv:2101.07243  [cond-mat.str-el].

[41]R. Bulirsch and J. Stoer, “Numerical treatment of ordinary differential equations by
     extrapolation methods”, Numer. Math. 8 1, (1966)1–13.

[42]  M. Henkel and A. Patkos, “Conformal structure in the spectrum of an altered quantum Ising
     chain”, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 20 8, (1987)2199.

[43]M. Henkel and G. Schutz, “Finite-lattice extrapolation algorithms”,        J. Phys. A: Math. Gen
     21 11, (1988)2617.

[44]J. Choquette, W. Gandhi, O. Giroux, N. Stam, and R. Krashinsky, “NVIDIA A100 Tensor
     Core GPU: Performance and Innovation”, IEEE Micro 41 2, (2021)29–35.

[45]A. Athenodorou and M. Teper, “On the spectrum and string tension of U(1) lattice gauge
     theory in 2 + 1 dimensions”, JHEP 01 (2019)063,                  arXiv:1811.06280  [hep-lat].

[46]  C. Luo, A. Athenodorou, S. Dubovsky, and M. Teper, “Confining strings and glueballs in ZN
     gauge theories”, PoS LATTICE2023 (2024)375,                  arXiv:2312.03855  [hep-lat].

[47]  K. Beach, L. Wang, and A. W. Sandvik, “Data collapse in the critical region using finite-size
     scaling with subleading corrections”, arXiv:cond-mat/0505194.

[48]D.-L. Deng, X. Li, and S. Das Sarma, “Quantum entanglement in neural network states”,
     Phys. Rev. X 7 2, (2017)021021,                       arXiv:1701.04844  [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[49]  R. Medina, R. Vasseur, and M. Serbyn, “Entanglement transitions from restricted boltzmann
     machines”, Phys. Rev. B 104 10, (2021)104205.

                                                         55
[50]A. Bulgarelli and M. Panero, “Entanglement entropy from non-equilibrium Monte Carlo
     simulations”, JHEP 06 (2023)030,                  arXiv:2304.03311  [quant-ph].

[51]A. Bulgarelli and M. Panero, “Duality transformations and the entanglement entropy of
     gauge theories”, JHEP 06 (2024)041,                  arXiv:2404.01987  [quant-ph].

[52]D. Kochkov and B. K. Clark, “Variational optimization in the ai era:  Computational graph
     states and supervised wave-function optimization”, 2018.
     https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12423.

[53]A. Szab´o and C. Castelnovo, “Neural network wave functions and the sign problem”,        Phys.
     Rev. Research 2 2 3, (2020)033075,                       arXiv:2002.04613  [cond-mat.str-el].

[54]  A. Cuzzocrea, A. Scemama, W. J. Briels, S. Moroni, and C. Filippi, “Variational principles in
     quantum Monte Carlo:  The troubled story of variance minimization”, J. Chem. Theory
     Comput. 16 7, (2020)4203–4212,                             arXiv:2002.05951  [physics.chem-ph].

[55]D.-B. Zhang, B.-L. Chen, Z.-H. Yuan, and T. Yin, “Variational quantum eigensolvers by
     variance minimization”, Chin. Phys. B 31 12, (2022)120301,                       arXiv:2006.15781
     [quant-ph].

[56]T. S. Cohen and M. Welling, “Group Equivariant Convolutional Networks”,
     arXiv:1602.07576  [cs.LG].

[57]  C. Roth and A. H. MacDonald, “Group convolutional neural networks improve quantum state
     accuracy”, arXiv:2104.05085  [quant-ph].

[58]P. Emonts, M. C. Ba˜nuls, I. Cirac, and E. Zohar, “Variational Monte Carlo simulation with
     tensor networks of a pure Z3 gauge theory in (2+1)d”, Phys. Rev. D 102 7, (2020)074501,
     arXiv:2008.00882  [quant-ph].

[59]D. Horn, M. Weinstein, and S. Yankielowicz, “Hamiltonian approach to Z(N) lattice gauge
     theories”, Phys. Rev. D 19 (1979)3715.

[60]P. Emonts, A. Kelman, U. Borla, S. Moroz, S. Gazit, and E. Zohar, “Finding the ground
     state of a lattice gauge theory with fermionic tensor networks:  A 2+1D Z2 demonstration”,
     Phys. Rev. D 107 1, (2023)014505,                       arXiv:2211.00023  [quant-ph].

[61]S. Elitzur, “Impossibility of Spontaneously Breaking Local Symmetries”,        Phys. Rev. D 12
     (1975)3978–3982.

[62]  E. H. Fradkin and L. Susskind, “Order and Disorder in Gauge Systems and Magnets”, Phys.
     Rev. D 17 (1978)2637.

                                                         56
[63]  A. Ritz-Zwilling, J.-N. Fuchs, and J. Vidal, “Wegner-Wilson loops in string nets”, Phys. Rev.
     B 103 7, (2021)075128,                       arXiv:2011.12609  [cond-mat.str-el].

[64]M. Creutz, “Asymptotic Freedom Scales”,       Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 (1980)313.

[65]  A. Gonzalez-Arroyo and M. Okawa, “The string tension from smeared Wilson loops at large
     N”, Phys. Lett. B 718 (2013)1524–1528,                             arXiv:1206.0049  [hep-th].

[66]D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, “Generalized Global Symmetries”,
     JHEP 02 (2015)172,                  arXiv:1412.5148  [hep-th].

[67]S. Sachdev, “Topological order, emergent gauge fields, and Fermi surface reconstruction”,
     Rept. Prog. Phys. 82 1, (2019)014001,                       arXiv:1801.01125  [cond-mat.str-el].

[68]B. C. Rayhaun and D. J. Williamson, “Higher-form subsystem symmetry breaking:
     Subdimensional criticality and fracton phase transitions”, SciPost Phys. 15 1, (2023)017,
     arXiv:2112.12735  [cond-mat.str-el].

[69]C.-M. Chang, Y.-H. Lin, S.-H. Shao, Y. Wang, and X. Yin, “Topological Defect Lines and
     Renormalization Group Flows in Two Dimensions”, JHEP 01 (2019)026,                 arXiv:1802.04445
     [hep-th].

[70]S. S. Bullock and G. K. Brennen, “Qudit surface codes and gauge theory with finite cyclic
     groups”, J. Phys. A 40 (2007)3481–3505,                             arXiv:quant-ph/0609070.

[71]N. Read and S. Sachdev, “Large-N expansion for frustrated quantum antiferromagnets”,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991)1773–1776.

[72]X. Wen, “Mean-field theory of spin-liquid states with finite energy gap and topological
     orders”, Phys. Rev. B 44 6, (1991)2664–2672.

[73]  F. A. Bais, P. van Driel, and M. de Wild Propitius, “Quantum symmetries in discrete gauge
     theories”, Phys. Lett. B 280 (1992)63–70,                     arXiv:hep-th/9203046.

[74]  J. M. Maldacena, G. W. Moore, and N. Seiberg, “D-brane charges in five-brane backgrounds”,
     JHEP 10 (2001)005,                  arXiv:hep-th/0108152.

[75]A. Y. Kitaev, “Fault tolerant quantum computation by anyons”,        Annals Phys. 303
     (2003)2–30,                    arXiv:quant-ph/9707021.

[76]M. Freedman, C. Nayak, K. Shtengel, K. Walker, and Z. Wang, “A class of P,T-invariant
     topological phases of interacting electrons”, Annals Phys. 310 2, (2004)428–492,
     arXiv:cond-mat/0307511.


                                                          57
[77]  T. H. Hansson, V. Oganesyan, and S. L. Sondhi, “Superconductors are topologically ordered”,
     Annals Phys. 313 2, (2004)497–538,                         arXiv:cond-mat/0404327.

[78]S. Sachdev,       Quantum Phase Transitions.  Cambridge University Press, 2011.

[79]J. Zinn-Justin, “Quantum field theory and critical phenomena”,        Int. Ser. Monogr. Phys. 92
     (1996)1–1008.

[80]X. Chen, Z. C. Gu, and X. G. Wen, “Local unitary transformation, long-range quantum
     entanglement, wave function renormalization, and topological order”, Phys. Rev. B 82
     (2010)155138,                       arXiv:1004.3835  [cond-mat.str-el].

[81]G. Bhanot and M. Creutz, “Phase diagram of   Z(N) and U(1) gauge theories in three
     dimensions”, Phys. Rev. D 21 10, (1980)2892–2902.

[82]C. Omero, “Gauge-invariant variational study of the Hamiltonian   U(1) and ZN  model and
     critical space-time dimensionality”, Phys. Lett. B 110 3–4, (1982)265–270.

[83]O. Borisenko, V. Chelnokov, G. Cortese, M. Gravina, A. Papa, and I. Surzhikov, “Phase
     transitions in the three-dimensional Z(N) models”, PoS LATTICE2013 (2014)347,
     arXiv:1311.0471  [hep-lat].

[84]  J. Vidal, S. Dusuel, and K. P. Schmidt, “Low-energy effective theory of the toric code model
     in a parallel field”, Phys. Rev. B 79 (2009)033109,                       arXiv:0807.0487  [cond-mat.other].

[85]M. D. Schulz, S. Dusuel, R. Orus, J. Vidal, and K. P. Schmidt, “Breakdown of a perturbed
     Z  N topological phase”, New J. Phys. 14 (2012)025005,                       arXiv:1110.3632
     [cond-mat.stat-mech].

[86]H. Grosse, C. B. Lang, and H. Nicolai, “Equivalence of the   Z(4) and Z(2)×Z(2) Lattice
     Gauge Theories”, Phys. Lett. B 98 (1981)69–73.

[87]  M. Campostrini, M. Hasenbusch, A. Pelissetto, P. Rossi, and E. Vicari, “Critical behavior of
     the three-dimensional XY universality class”, Phys. Rev. B 63 (2001)214503,
     arXiv:cond-mat/0010360.

[88]A. M. Polyakov, “Compact Gauge Fields and the Infrared Catastrophe”,        Phys. Lett. B 59
     (1975)82–84.

[89]A. M. Polyakov, “Quark Confinement and Topology of Gauge Groups”,        Nucl. Phys. B 120
     (1977)429–458.

[90]  M. Creutz, L. Jacobs, and C. Rebbi, “Monte Carlo Study of Abelian Lattice Gauge Theories”,
     Phys. Rev. D 20 (1979)1915.

                                                         58
 [91]A. Apte, C. Cordova, and H. T. Lam, “Obstructions to gapped phases from noninvertible
       symmetries”, Phys. Rev. B 108 4, (2023)045134,                       arXiv:2212.14605  [hep-th].

 [92]  H. W. J. Bl¨ote and Y. Deng, “Cluster Monte Carlo simulation of the transverse Ising model”,
       Phys. Rev. E 66 (2002)066110.

 [93]I. S. Tupitsyn, A. Kitaev, N. V. Prokof’ev, and P. C. E. Stamp, “Topological multicritical
       point in the Toric Code and 3D gauge Higgs Models”, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010)085114,
       arXiv:0804.3175  [cond-mat.stat-mech].

 [94]J. Tilly       et al., “The Variational Quantum Eigensolver:  A review of methods and best
       practices”, Phys. Rept. 986 (2022)1–128,                     arXiv:2111.05176  [quant-ph].

 [95]U. Wolff, “Critical slowing down”,       Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 17 (1990)93–102.

 [96]I. G¨uhring, M. Raslan, and G. Kutyniok,       Expressivity of Deep Neural Networks, p. 149–199.
       Cambridge University Press, 2022.

 [97]K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition”, in
       Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778.
       2016.  arXiv:1512.03385  [cs.CV].

 [98]  J. Heek, A. Levskaya, A. Oliver, M. Ritter, B. Rondepierre, A. Steiner, and M. van Zee, “Flax:
       A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX.” https://github.com/google/flax.

 [99]R. Assaraf and M. Caffarel, “Zero-variance zero-bias principle for observables in quantum
       Monte Carlo:  Application to forces”, J. Chem. Phys. 119 20, (2003)10536–10552,
       arXiv:physics/0310035.

[100]D. Mishkin and J. Matas, “All you need is a good init”,         arXiv:1511.06422  [cs.LG].

[101]  S. Sorella, “Green function Monte Carlo with stochastic reconfiguration”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80
       20, (1998)4558–4561,                             arXiv:cond-mat/9803107.

[102]  S. Sorella, “Generalized Lanczos algorithm for variational quantum Monte Carlo”, Phys. Rev.
       B 64 2, (2001)024512,                       arXiv:cond-mat/0009149.

[103]S.-i. Amari, “Natural Gradient Works Efficiently in Learning”,         Neural Comput. 10 2,
      (1998)251–276.

[104]  C.-Y. Park and M. J. Kastoryano, “Geometry of learning neural quantum states”, Phys. Rev.
       Research 2 2, (2020)023232,                       arXiv:1910.11163  [quant-ph].




                                                           59
[105]  A. Chen and M. Heyl, “Efficient optimization of deep neural quantum states toward machine
       precision”, arXiv:2302.01941  [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[106]R. Rende, L. L. Viteritti, L. Bardone, F. Becca, and S. Goldt, “A simple linear algebra
       identity to optimize large-scale neural network quantum states”, arXiv:2310.05715
       [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[107]  C. G. West, A. Garcia-Saez, and T.-C. Wei, “Efficient evaluation of high-order moments and
       cumulants in tensor network states”, Phys. Rev. B 92 11, (2015)115103,                       arXiv:1503.07045
       [cond-mat].

[108]D. Wu         et al., “Variational Benchmarks for Quantum Many-Body Problems”,
       arXiv:2302.04919  [quant-ph].

[109]D. H. Weinstein, “Modified ritz method”,         Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 20 9, (1934)529–532.

[110]A. F. Stevenson, “On the lower bounds of Weinstein and Romberg in quantum mechanics”,
       Phys. Rev. 53 (1938)199–199.

[111]A. Kitaev, “Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond”,         Annals Phys. 321 1,
      (2006)2–111,                     arXiv:cond-mat/0506438.

[112]F. J. Wegner, “Duality in Generalized Ising Models and Phase Transitions Without Local
       Order Parameters”, J. Math. Phys. 12 (1971)2259–2272.

[113]  S. Elitzur, R. B. Pearson, and J. Shigemitsu, “The Phase Structure of Discrete Abelian Spin
       and Gauge Systems”, Phys. Rev. D 19 (1979)3698.

[114]S. Trebst, P. Werner, M. Troyer, K. Shtengel, and C. Nayak, “Breakdown of a topological
       phase:  Quantum phase transition in a loop gas model with tension”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98
      (2007)070602,                       arXiv:cond-mat/0609048.

[115]C.-N. Yang and T. D. Lee, “Statistical theory of equations of state and phase transitions. 1.
       Theory of condensation”, Phys. Rev. 87 (1952)404–409.

[116]T. D. Lee and C.-N. Yang, “Statistical theory of equations of state and phase transitions. 2.
       Lattice gas and Ising model”, Phys. Rev. 87 (1952)410–419.

[117]M. E. Fisher and M. N. Barber, “Scaling theory for finite-size effects in the critical region”,
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 28 (1972)1516–1519.

[118]S. Rychkov, “3D Ising Model:  a view from the Conformal Bootstrap Island”,         Comptes
       Rendus Physique 21 2, (2020)185–198,                         arXiv:2007.14315  [math-ph].


                                                          60
[119]J. Cardy,         Scaling and Renormalization in Statistical Physics.  Cambridge University Press,
       1996.

[120]  S. M. Bhattacharjee and F. Seno, “A measure of data collapse for scaling”, J. Phys. A: Math.
      Gen. 34 33, (2001)6375–6380.

[121]F. Kos, D. Poland, D. Simmons-Duffin, and A. Vichi, “Precision Islands in the Ising and
       O(N) Models”, JHEP 08 (2016)036,                  arXiv:1603.04436  [hep-th].

[122]D. Simmons-Duffin, “The Lightcone Bootstrap and the Spectrum of the 3d Ising CFT”,
      JHEP 03 (2017)086,                  arXiv:1612.08471  [hep-th].

[123]  J. Xu, A. M. Ferrenberg, and D. P. Landau, “92 Years of the Ising Model:  A High Resolution
       Monte Carlo Study”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1012 1, (2018)012002.

[124]M. Hasenbusch, “Finite size scaling study of lattice models in the three-dimensional Ising
       universality class”, Phys. Rev. B 82 17, (2010)174433,                       arXiv:1004.4486
       [cond-mat.stat-mech].

[125]  A. M. Ferrenberg, J. Xu, and D. P. Landau, “Pushing the limits of Monte Carlo simulations
       for the three-dimensional Ising model”, Phys. Rev. E 97 4, (2018)043301,                       arXiv:1806.03558
       [physics.comp-ph].

[126]R. Guida and J. Zinn-Justin, “Critical exponents of the N-vector model”,         J. Phys. A: Math.
      Gen. 31 40, (1998)8103–8121.

[127]  J. B. Kogut, “An Introduction to Lattice Gauge Theory and Spin Systems”, Rev. Mod. Phys.
       51 (1979)659.

[128]D. Robaina, M. C. Ba˜nuls, and J. I. Cirac, “Simulating 2 + 1   D Z3 Lattice Gauge Theory
       with an Infinite Projected Entangled-Pair State”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 5, (2021)050401,
       arXiv:2007.11630  [hep-lat].

[129]  S. Iino, S. Morita, N. Kawashima, and A. W. Sandvik, “Detecting signals of weakly first-order
       phase transitions in two-dimensional Potts models”, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88 3, (2019)034006,
       arXiv:1801.02786  [cond-mat.stat-mech].

[130]E. Buffenoir and S. Wallon, “The Correlation length of the Potts model at the first order
       transition point”, J. Phys. A 26 (1993)3045–3062.

[131]M. Fukugita and M. Okawa, “Correlation Length of the Three State Potts Model in
       Three-dimensions”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989)13.



                                                          61
[132]J. Cotler and S. Rezchikov, “Renormalizing Diffusion Models”,         arXiv:2308.12355
       [hep-th].

[133]H. E. Stanley, “Scaling, universality, and renormalization:  Three pillars of modern critical
       phenomena”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 2, (1999)S358–S366.

[134]B. Widom, “The critical point and scaling theory”,         Physica 73 1, (1974)107–118.

[135]  M. Laplace, “XIII. General method for determining the orbits of comets”, The Philosophical
       Magazine 39 166, (1812)85–90.

[136]  B. Efron,“Bootstrap methods:  Another look at the jackknife”,in                         Breakthroughs in Statistics:
       Methodology and Distribution, pp. 569–593.  Springer New York, 1992.

[137]H. Suwa, A. Sen, and A. W. Sandvik, “Level spectroscopy in a two-dimensional quantum
       magnet:  Linearly dispersing spinons at the deconfined quantum critical point”, Phys. Rev. B
       94 14, (2016)144416,                       arXiv:1607.05110  [cond-mat.str-el].






































                                                            62