Highlights

Neural network based approach for solving problems in plane wave
duct acoustics
D. Veerababu, Prasanta K. Ghosh

    •  PINNs-based  solution  for  problems  in  frequency  domain  acoustics  is
      presented.

    •  Problems associated with the existing Lagrange multiplier method are
      discussed.

    •  Acoustic field is predicted in the ducts of two different cross-sections.

    •  Mean  flow  and  visco-thermal  effects  are  captured  with  a  maximum
      error ofO(10−4).

    •  Results show the ability of PINNs to emerge as an acoustic solver in
      the future.
Neural network based approach for solving problems in
                          plane wave duct acoustics

                        D. Veerababua, Prasanta K. Ghosha,∗

                aDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of
                       Science, Bengaluru, 560012, Karnataka, India



Abstract
Neural networks have emerged as a tool for solving differential equations in
many branches of engineering and science.  But their progress in frequency
domain acoustics is limited by the vanishing gradient problem that occurs at
higher frequencies.  This paper discusses a formulation that can address this
issue.  The problem of solving the governing differential equation along with
the boundary conditions is posed as an unconstrained optimization problem.
The acoustic field is approximated to the output of a neural network which
is constructed in such a way that it always satisfies the boundary conditions.
The applicability of the formulation is demonstrated on popular problems in
plane wave acoustic theory.  The predicted solution from the neural network
formulation  is  compared  with  those  obtained  from  the  analytical  solution.
A  good  agreement  is  observed  between  the  two  solutions.   The  method  of
transfer learning to calculate the particle velocity from the existing acoustic
pressure  field  is  demonstrated  with  and  without  mean  flow  effects.   The
sensitivity of the training process to the choice of the activation function and
the number of collocation points is studied.
Keywords:   Helmholtz equation, Uniform duct, Gradually varying area
duct, Narrow-tube effects, Convective effects, Optimization




   ∗Corresponding author.
    Email address:  prasantg@iisc.ac.in (Prasanta K. Ghosh)







Preprint submitted to Journal of Sound and Vibration                                    May 9, 2024
1.  Introduction

    Advancements in data-driven methodologies have revolutionized both sci-
ence and engineering disciplines.  Neural networks enabled researchers to ex-
tract  valuable  insights  from  large  and  complex  datasets.   They  have  been
successfully  used  in  structural  health  monitoring  [1,  2,  3],  especially  crack
and damage detection [4, 5].  In the area of acoustics, neural networks have
been shown to be successful in capturing wave propagation phenomena from
numerical simulation  datasets.  Stefan  Sack  and Mats  ˚Abom  [6]  used  neu-
ral  networks  to  decompose  plane  waves  inside  a  uniform  duct.    In  their
work,  they  used  numerical  simulation  data  obtained  by  solving  Linearized
Navier-Stokes equations.  Alguacil et al.  [7] modeled sound propagation in
a  two-dimensional  quiescent  media  with  the  help  of  neural  networks  using
the database from Lattice-Boltzmann temporal simulations.  Although neu-
ral  networks  offer  promising  results  with  numerical  simulation  data  (in  a
supervised way), in many other cases, the acquired data alone may not be
sufficient to accurately model physical phenomena due to incomplete mea-
surements, limited observations, or the presence of underlying physical laws
[8].   In  such  scenarios,  the  incorporation  of  prior  knowledge  and  physical
constraints becomes crucial to build reliable and interpretable models.
    By incorporating prior knowledge of the underlying physics and exploit-
ing the expressive power of neural networks,  physics-based neural network
formulation  provide  a  versatile  framework  for  capturing  complex  relation-
ships between dependent and independent variables in the governing equa-
tions as well as initial conditions (ICs) and/or boundary conditions (BCs)
[9].   This  mesh-less  framework  can  offer  reliable  and  faster  solutions  com-
plementary to traditional mesh-based finite element methods [10], boundary
element methods [11, 12], and computational fluid dynamics techniques [13].
In the neural network formulation, feedforward neural networks are used as
function appproximators, and the problem of solving the governing differen-
tial  equations  along  with  the  ICs  and/or  BCs  is  posed  as  an  optimization
problem.  The function to be optimized, known as the loss function, is calcu-
lated as a weighted summation of the individual loss functions computed as
the residuals of the governing differential equations,  ICs and/or BCs upon
approximating the desired output variables to a feedforward neural network
[14, 15].
    Several research groups successfully implemented neural network formula-
tion to solve Burgers’ equation [9], Schr¨ondinger equation [9], Klein-Gordon


                                               2
equation  [16],  Poisson  equation  [16],  etc.   Attempts  have  been  carried  out
to solve the Navier-Stokes equation as well [17, 18, 19].  This article demon-
strates the inherent flexibility of the feedforward neural network to efficiently
represent complex wave behavior while satisfying the governing acoustic wave
equations  and  the  BCs  in  the  frequency  domain.   Implementation  of  the
neural  network  formulation  for  the  Helmholtz  equation  can  be  evidenced
in the literature.  However,  the analysis is limited to the lower frequencies
[20, 16, 21, 22]. The frequency-dependent behavior of the Helmholtz equation
and  its  sensitivity  to  boundary  conditions  present  significant  challenges  in
obtaining accurate and efficient solutions, particularly in the high-frequency
regimes.  At higher frequencies,  the network encounters  vanishing  gradient
problem which causes the training process to bias towards one of the loss func-
tions [22].  This results in inaccurate predictions.  By tuning the individual
weights associated with each loss function, the problem can be circumvented.
However, these weights are sensitive to frequency and BCs.  The weights cho-
sen for a particular frequency and BCs are not suitable for others.  Automatic
weight update algorithms have been developed to dynamically adjust weights
during each iteration or over a set of iterations [14, 15, 16, 22]. However, most
of these algorithms require manual tuning of the hyperparameters which vary
for each frequency and chosen BCs. In addition, prediction of complex-valued
acoustic field due to sound propagation in absorptive medium or inside the
narrow ducts is challenging as the loss function to be minimized has to be
always a real-valued function.
    This article adopts a methodology that addresses the aforementioned dif-
ficulties  and  offers  a  reliable  solution  to  the  fundamental  problems  in  the
frequency domain acoustics.  The versatility and efficacy of the methodology
is demonstrated through comprehensive numerical experiments and compar-
isons with analytical solutions.  The following three classical problems from
the plane wave duct acoustic theory are chosen for demonstration purposes
[23].

  (i)Prediction of the acoustic field in a uniform duct [23]

 (ii)Prediction  of  the  acoustic  field  in  a  gradually  varying  cross-sectional
       area duct [24]

 (iii)Prediction  of  complex-valued  acoustic  pressure  in  a  narrow  uniform
       duct [25]


                                                3
    In  addition  to  training  the  network  from  scratch,  the  use  of  a  transfer
learning approach  [26, 27, 28, 29] is demonstrated.  In this approach, a new
neural network is trained using the output of an existing neural network. This
technique enables us to predict other acoustic variables such as particle ve-
locity, acoustic impedance, power, intensity, etc., from the existing variables.
In this work, the transfer learning technique is demonstrated by predicting
the  particle  velocity  from  the  existing  acoustic  pressure  in  a  uniform  duct
with and without convective mean flow effects.  The potential challenges and
limitations associated with the application of neural networks in solving fre-
quency domain acoustic problems are also discussed.  These include network
architecture resolution, especially training data, and the activation function
to ensure robust and stable convergence.
    The article is organized as follows.  Section 2 gives a theoretical descrip-
tion of the physics-based neural network formulation and its application to
chosen problems.  The results obtained from the neural network formulation
are  compared  with  the  analytical  solutions  in  Section  3.   The  method  of
transfer learning and the sensitivity study of the neural network architecture
to different frequencies are also discussed in the same section.  The article is
concluded in Section 4 with final remarks.

2.  Physics-based neural network formulation
    Let us consider a problem of solving a differential equation

                             D[ψ(x) ] =s(x),  ∀ x∈ Ω,                               (1)

subjected to the boundary conditions

                              ψ(x) =g(x),  ∀ x∈∂Ω,                                 (2)

whereD[· ]  is  the  differential  operator, ψ(x)  is  the  field  variable, s(x)  is
the forcing function, g(x) is the set of prescribed boundary values, Ω is the
domain, ∂Ω is the boundary of the domain, and x is the spatial vector.
    According to the universal approximation theorem (UAT), any field vari-
able such asψ(x) considered in the above problem can be approximated by a
neural network provided the field variableψ(x) is a continuous and bounded
function within the domain of interest [30].  It is important to note here that
the UAT states the possibility of finding the neural network with the desired


                                               4
accuracy.  However, it does not provide sufficient information on the required
network architecture and optimization algorithm to find it.
    Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of a feedforward neural network
with m layers and n neurons in each hidden layer.























               Figure 1:  Schematic diagram of a feedforward neural network.

    A  typical  feedforward  neural  network  used  in  the  physics-based  neural
network formulation does not take the field variable information either from
the  experiments  or  from  other  numerical  simulations  as  input.   Instead,  it
takes the domain information (x) in a descritized format.  It is then passed
from the  input layer to the  first hidden layer,  where it undergoes  through
a nonlinear function along with the weights and biases associated with that
particular neuron.
    If fq  represents the output of the q-th hidden layer,  where q  = 1,  2,  3,
..., m− 1, then the feedforward network shown in Fig. 1 is mathematically
represented as follows [31]
                                    f0 = x,                                                             (3)
                                    fq =σ(Wqfq−1 + bq),                                      (4)
                                   fm = Wmfm−1 + bm,                                        (5)
where f0 is the output of the input-layer, fm is the output of the output-layer,
{Wq, bq} and{Wm, bm} are the set of weights and biases of theq-th hidden

                                                 5
layer  and  the  output-layer,  respectively.   Here, σ  is  called  the  activation
function through which nonlinearity is introduced into the network. If  ˆψ(x;θ)
represents  the  neural  network  approximation  for ψ(x),  then  ˆψ(x;θ)  = fm,
where θ ={Wq, bq, Wm, bm}, q = 1, 2, 3, ..., m− 1, are the parameters of
the network.
    Now,  ˆψ(x;θ) can be found by solving the following optimisation problem
[16]
                             minθ  Ld(xd;θ),    xd∈ Ω
                              s.t. Lb(xb;θ) = 0,    xb∈∂Ω                               (6)
whereLd andLb are the loss functions associated with the differential equa-
tion and the boundary conditions, respectively.  They are defined as follows

                                        NdX  D[ ˆψ(x(i)                  2
                   Ld(xd;θ) =   1Nd                    d  ;θ) ]−s(x(i)d  )  2,                   (7)
                                        i=1
                                        NbX  ˆψ(x(i)                2
                    Lb(xb;θ) =   1Nb               b  ;θ)−g(x(i)b  )   2.                          (8)
                                        i=1

Here,∥·∥2 represents theL2-norm,Nd andNb are the number of collocation
points inside the domain and on the boundary withi-th point is represented
by x(i)d   and x(i)b  , respectively.
    It  is  a  constrained  optimization  problem.   It  can  be  converted  into  an
unconstrained optimisation problem using two approaches:

1) Lagrange Multiplier Approach:

Using the Lagrange multiplier λj, the constrained optimisation problem in
Eq. (6) can be converted into an unconstrained optimisation problem as fol-
lows [16]
                                                   MX
                                   minθ  Ld +          λjLb,j,                                      (9)
                                                  j=1
where j  =  1,  2,  3,  ..., M  are  the  boundaries  with  the  corresponding  loss
functionsLb,j and the Lagrange multipliers λj.





                                                6
2) Trial Solution Approach:

In this approach, a trial neural network is constructed that exactly satisfies
the boundary conditions prior to training the network.  Since the network al-
ready satisfies the boundary conditions, their contribution towards the total
loss function will be dropped and the optimisation problem can be written
as [32]
                            minθ  Ld(x;θ),    x ={xd, xb},                             (10)

where
                                       NX D[ ˆψt(x(i);θ) ]−s(x(i))     2
                    Ld(x;θ) =  1N                                         2.                  (11)
                                      i=1
Here,  ˆψt(x;θ) is the trial neural network, andN is the number of collocation
points of the entire domain including the boundaries.
    Both these approaches are equally efficient in solving a wide variety of
governing equations occurring in many branches of engineering and physical
sciences.  However, in solving certain class of problems such as acoustic field
prediction in the frequency domain, the former approach encounters vanishing
gradient  problem  at  higher  frequencies.   That  is,  the  gradients  of  the  loss
functionLb  with  respect  to  the  parameters  become  almost  equal  to  zero
at  higher  frequencies.   Due  to  this,  the  parametric  update  with  respect  to
loss functionLb halts during the backpropagation.  This causes the training
process to bias towards the other loss functionLd[22].  See Appendix  A for
complete details.  Automatic update procedures for the Lagrange multiplier
were  developed  to  avoid  biasing  [22,  14,  16,  15].   However,  most  of  these
methods involve manual tuning of the hyperparameters for each frequency
considered in the analysis.  Hence, the latter approach is adopted throughout
this work as it has only one loss functionLd to optimize.
    The trial solution approach does not require any automatic update pro-
cedures  and/or  hyperparameter  tuning.   Therefore,  it  is  more  suitable  to
solve acoustic problems in the frequency domain.  The following subsections
demonstrate the application of this approach to three different problems in
the area of plane wave duct acoustics.  Note that throughout this article p
refers to the acoustic pressure and u refers to the particle velocity.





                                               7
2.1.  Uniform duct
    The acoustic pressure in a uniform duct can be obtained by solving the
following one-dimensional (1-D) Helmholtz equation [33]
                           d2
                           dx2 +k2        p(x) = 0,   x∈ [x1,x2]                        (12)

where k =ω/c is the wavenumber, ω = 2πf/c is the angular frequency, c is
the speed of sound, and f  is the frequency.
    Let us assume the boundary conditions at x1 and x2 be

                                          p(x1) =p1,                                           (13a)
                                          p(x2) =p2.                                           (13b)

If ˆp(x;θ) represents the neural network approximation for the acoustic pres-
sure p(x),  the  trial  neural  network  ˆpt(x;θ)  that  exactly  satisfy  the  chosen
boundary conditions can be constructed as follows [32]

                          ˆpt(x;θ) =ϕ2p1 +ϕ1p2 +ϕ1ϕ2ˆp(x;θ),                         (14)

where ϕ1  and ϕ2  are the functions of the space variable x which are to be
constructed in such a way that
                                          (
                                   ϕ1 =     0    at  x =x1,
                                          (1    at  x =x2,                                  (15a)
                                   ϕ2 =     1    at  x =x1,
                                            0    at  x =x2.                                  (15b)

    The functions that satisfy above mentioned rules can be constructed as
follows

                                         ϕ1 = x−x1x2−x1,                                         (16a)

                                         ϕ2 = x2−xx2−x1.                                         (16b)

It can be observed that the trial neural network  ˆpt(x;θ) has two parts.  The
first part contains only the boundary terms and does not contain any terms
associated with the neural network ˆp(x;θ).  On the contrary, the second part

                                                 8
contains only the neural network and vanishes on the boundary.  The first
part ensures that the trial neural network satisfies the boundary conditions
throughout the training process, whereas the second part contributes to the
estimation of derivatives with respect to the space variable (d/dx, d2/dx2).
    According to Eq. (11), the loss function which is to be optimized to predict
the acoustic pressure can be written as follows

                            NX            d                                      2
           L(x;θ) =  1              d                         +k2ˆpt(x(i);θ)
                        N  i=1    dx(i)   dx(i) ˆpt(x(i);θ)                      2.        (17)

2.2.  Duct with gradually varying cross-sectional area
    The plane wave acoustic field in a duct whose cross-sectional area changes
gradually as a function of longitudinal position can be obtained by solving
Webster equation given below [24]
               d2             dS(x)    d
               dx2 +    1S(x)   dx    dx +k2      p(x) = 0,   x∈ [x1,x2]          (18)

where S(x) is the cross-sectional area of the duct which varies as a function
of x∈ [x1,x2].
    The presence of additional term due to the area change makes the Webster
equation differ significantly from the Helmholtz equation while solving it by
the analytical means.  However, in terms of the neural network formulation,
there are no substantial differences in implementing solution procedures for
both  governing  equations.   The  construction  of  the  trial  neural  networks
remains the same as in Eq. (14) provided the Webster equation is subject to
similar boundary conditions as in Eqs. (13a) and (13b).  The only difference
occurs in the calculation of the loss functionL(x;θ).  The loss function in
Eq. (17) should be replaced with


                   NX            d
  L(x;θ) =  1              d
               N   i=1        1dx(i)dx(i) ˆpt(x(i);θ)   d
                     +               d
                          S(x(i))  dx(i)S(x(i))        dx(i) ˆpt(x(i);θ)
                                                                                     2
                                                                 + k2ˆpt(x(i);θ)
                                                                                     2.   (19)


                                              9
2.3.  Duct with narrow-tube effects
    When the sound is propagating inside a duct, it will experience a dissi-
pation through the visco-thermal effects.  These effects are negligible when
the sound is propagating through large cross-sectional ducts.  However, when
the  sound  is  propagating  through  narrow  ducts,  these  effects  will  become
significant.  It is for the same reason that these effects are also known as the
narrow-tube effects.  Most of the models incorporate these effects in terms of
the medium properties [25].
    The speed of sound and the density of air are considered to be real-valued
and constant throughout the frequency range when analyzing sound propa-
gation inside large cross-sectional ducts [23].  However, in the narrow ducts
these properties are considered to be complex-valued, and functions of the
frequency.  Due to the narrow tube effects, the acoustic field inside the duct
will  become  a  complex-valued  function  [25].   Performing  an  optimization
process to generate complex-valued output is not a trivial task, as the loss
function  to  be  optimized  has  to  be  always  a  real-valued  function.   In  this
subsection,  a  methodology  is  presented  which  predicts  the  complex-valued
acoustic pressure due to the narrow-tube effects in a uniform duct, by sepa-
rating the real and imaginary-part of the governing equations as well as the
boundary conditions [9].
    Let cw  = cR +jcI  and kw  = kR +jkI  = ω/cw  be  the  complex-valued
frequency-dependent speed of sound and wavenumber,  respectively.  Then,
the complex-valued acoustic pressure pw  = pR +jpI  in a uniform duct can
be obtained by solving
                           d2
                           dx2 +k2w      pw = 0.   x∈ [x1,x2]                         (20)

Here, the subscriptsR andI represent the real and imaginary parts, respec-
tively.
    Let the boundary conditions also be complex-valued

                      pw(x1) =pR(x1) +jpI(x1) =p1,R +jp1,I,                   (21a)
                      pw(x2) =pR(x2) +jpI(x2) =p2,R +jp2,I.                   (21b)

    Upon substitutingkw andpw, Eqs. (20), (21a) and (21b) can be arranged
as  two  sets  of  governing  equations.   One  set  associated  with  the  real-part
and other set associated with the imaginary-part of the acoustic pressure as
follows

                                              10
1) Equations associated with the real-part:
                         d2pR                 pR− 2kRkIpI = 0,                         (22a)
                         dx2  + k2R−k2I
                                                         pR(x1) =p1,R,                     (22b)
                                                         pR(x2) =p2,R.                     (22c)
2) Equations associated with the imaginary-part:
                         d2pI                 pI + 2kRkIpR = 0,                         (23a)
                          dx2  + k2R−k2I
                                                          pI(x1) =p1,I,                      (23b)
                                                          pI(x2) =p2,I.                      (23c)
The corresponding trial neural network parts can be constructed as follows
                      ˆpt,R(x;θ) =ϕ2p1,R +ϕ1p2,R +ϕ1ϕ2ˆpR(x;θ),                    (24)
                       ˆpt,I(x;θ) =ϕ2p1,I +ϕ1p2,I +ϕ1ϕ2ˆpI(x;θ),                      (25)
where  ˆpR(x;θ)  and  ˆpI(x;θ)  are  the  neural  network  approximations  for  the
real  and  imaginary  parts  of  the  acoustic  pressure,  respectively.   These can
be predicted using the same neural network architecture as shown in Fig. 1,
except that the output-layer should be replaced with a layer containing two
neurons as shown in Fig. 2.  One neuron is to predict the real-part and the
other neuron is to predict the imaginary-part of the acoustic pressure.
    From  Eqs.  (22a)  and  (23a),  the  loss  function  to  be  optimized  can  be
written as follows
                              L(x;θ) =LR(x;θ) +LI(x;θ),                              (26)
where
                      NX             d
  LR(x;θ) =  1                d
                 N   i=1    dx(i)    dx(i) ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)
                               + k2R−k2I ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)− 2kRkI ˆpt,I(x(i);θ)              2

                                                                                          2,   (27)

                      NX            d
  LI(x;θ) =  1                d
                 N   i=1   dx(i)     dx(i) ˆpt,I(x(i);θ)
                               + k2R−k2I       ˆpt,I(x(i);θ) + 2kRkI ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)       2

                                                                                          2.   (28)

                                                11
Figure 2:  Schematic diagram of a feedforward neural network to predict complex-valued
acoustic pressure.

It is important to note here that the Eqs. (22a) and (23a) are coupled equa-
tions.  They have to be solved simultaneously.  In terms of the neural network
formulation, this can be interpreted as finding the shared parameters which
minimize the loss functionsLR  andLI,  simultaneously.  This can be done
by  combining  the  loss  functions  as  shown  in  Eq.  (26)  and  performing  the
optimization procedure.
    It  is  worth  noting  here  that  in  Eq.  (26),  loss  functions  are  added  with
equal  weights  in  similar  lines  with  the  method  discussed  in  Appendix   A.
It may be expected that it will introduce biasing behavior into the training
process. The biasing occurs when one of the loss gradients vanishes during the
backpropagation.  This happens when we add the loss functions containing
derivative terms of significantly different orders [15, 22].  The derivative terms
in the loss functionsLR andLI in Eq. (26) are of the same order.  Therefore,
the chances are much lower to encounter a biasing problem.






                                               12
3.  Results and Discussion

    To  predict  the  acoustic  pressure,  a  neural  network,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1
is constructed with the architecture mentioned in Table 1.  The information
regarding the discretization of the domain and specifications of the optimizer
used are also presented in it.  The architecture is chosen in a similar way to
that used by other researchers working in the area of physics-informed neural
networks [9, 16, 22].

              Table 1:  Neural network architecture and optimizer information

          Sl.  No.                           Parameter                             Value
              1        No.  of layers (m)                                             7
              2        No.  of neurons in each hidden-layer (n)         90
              3        Activation function (σ)                                   sin
              4        No.  of internal collocation points (Nd)        14000
              5        No.  of boundary collocation points (Nb)         2
              6        Optimizer                                                   L-BFGS
              7        No.  of iterations                                           14000
              8        Optimal tolerance                                          10−3

    The implementation is carried out in MATLAB (Version R2022b) with
the  help  of  the  Deep  Learning  Toolbox™  and  the  Statistics  and  Machine
Learning Toolbox™.  It is to be noted here that during the implementation,
the  nonlinearity  due  to  the  activation  function  should  be  restricted  to  the
hidden-layers only.  The activation function of the output-layer should always
be linear so that it does not limit the amplitude of the acoustic field to its
nonlinear range ([−1, 1]).

3.1.  Acoustic pressure:  Uniform duct
    To predict the acoustic pressure in a uniform duct according to the for-
mulation  given  in  Section  2.1,  a  duct  of  length  1  m  as  shown  in  Fig.  3  is
considered.  The inlet and outlet boundary conditions (Eqs. (13a) and (13b))
are assumed to be p1 = 1 and p2 =−1, respectively.
    The analysis is carried out between 500 Hz and 2000 Hz in steps of 500
Hz.  The results are compared in Fig. 4.  It can be observed that the acoustic
pressure predicted by the neural network formulation using the trial solution


                                                 13
        Figure 3:  Schematic diagram of a uniform duct with boundary conditions.











Figure 4:  Acoustic pressure in a uniform duct:             true solution,         predicted solu-
tion.

approach (predicted solution) is in good agreement with that of the analytical
method (true solution).  Refer to Appendix  B for the analytical solution.
    The relative error between the two methods (δp) is calculated according
to the following formulation and is used as a performance metric throughout
the article.                       vuut
                                       NtX
                                           |ˆpt(x(i);θ)−p(x(i))|2
                                       i=1
                            δp =           vuut                        ,                           (29)
                                               NtX
                                                   |p(x(i))|2
                                               i=1
where Nt  is  the  total  number  of  linearly  spaced  test  points  in  the  domain
[0, 1], p(x(i)) is the acoustic pressure calculated using the analytical method
at i-th test point.  In the current study, Nt is taken as 500.  The results for
all four frequencies are tabulated in Table 2.  It can be seen that the errors
are almost negligible, which indicates that the neural network formulation is
capable of learning the underlying physics from the governing equations at
lower and higher frequencies with the trial solution approach.





                                                14
    Table 2:  Relative error between predicted and true solution for the uniform duct

                             Frequency (Hz)     δp
                                     500             8.5538×10−7
                                     1000            3.6359×10−5
                                     1500            7.7487×10−6
                                     2000            5.1628×10−5


3.2.  Acoustic pressure:  Duct with gradually varying cross-sectional area
    Unlike  the  uniform  duct,  the  estimation  of  the  pressure  distribution  in
a gradually varying cross-sectional duct by analytical means is not a trivial
task.   One  has  to  adopt  power  series  solutions  [24,  34]  or  a  segmentation
approach  [35,  36].   However,  using  neural  networks,  this  can  be  achieved
with the same effort as in the case of a uniform duct.  To demonstrate this,
a rectangular duct is considered whose cross-sectional area gradually varies
as shown in Fig. 5.















          Figure 5:  Schematic diagram of a gradually varying rectangular duct.

    The length of the duct and the boundary conditions are assumed to be
the same as those of the uniform duct.  The cross-sectional area of the duct
is assumed to be varying quadratically with respect to the position, i.e.,S(x)
in Eq. (18) is assumed to be taken the form

                                 S(x) =S0 +S1x +S2x2,                                  (30)





                                                15
where the coefficients S0, S1, and S2, which can be found as [24]

                                  S0 = 4h1w1,                                                     (31)
                                  S1 = 4(h1mw +w1mh),                                   (32)
                                  S2 = 4mhmw.                                                  (33)

Here,mh andmw are the slopes along height and width, respectively.  These
can be calculated as

                                        mh = h2−h1x2−x1,                                          (34)

                                       mw = w2−w1x2−x1.                                         (35)

In the current study, the cross-sectional dimensions of the inlet are taken as
h1 = 10 mm andw1 = 20 mm, and the dimensions of the outlet are taken as
h2 = 3h1 and w2 = 3w1.











Figure   6:     Acoustic   pressure   in   a   varying   rectangular   duct:       true   solution,
       predicted solution.

    Figure 6 shows the comparison of the acoustic pressure obtained from the
neural network formulation (predicted solution) against that obtained from
the boundary value problem solver (bvp4c) in MATLAB (true solution).  A
pseudocode on the application of  bvp4c to the current problem is given in
Appendix  C. It can be observed that the predicted solution agrees well with
the true solution throughout the frequency range considered.  The relative
error between the two solutions is reported in Table 3.
    It must be noted here that the peak value of the acoustic pressure in a
uniform duct does not change with position, whereas in a gradually increasing
area  duct  it  decreases  with  respect  to  the  position  for  a  given  boundary
conditions.   This  is  due  to  the  damping  characteristics  introduced  by  the
additional term (due to the area change) into the system.

                                                16
Table 3:  Relative error between predicted and true solution for gradually varying cross-
sectional area duct

                              Frequency (Hz)     δp
                                      500             1.7972×10−4
                                     1000            6.584e×10−3
                                     1500            1.7072×10−4
                                     2000            2.6383×10−4


3.3.  Acoustic pressure:  Duct with narrow-tube effects
    To predict the complex-valued acoustic pressure due to  narrow-tube  ef-
fects, a uniform duct similar to the one in Section 3.1, is considered with the
same boundary conditions.  The narrow-tube effects will become significant
when the cross-sectional dimensions of the duct are smaller than the acoustic
wavelength [25].  Hence, the radius of the duct (a) is considered 0.5 mm.
    The  expression  for  the  frequency  dependent  complex-valued  wavenum-
ber (kw) and the characteristic impedance (zw) for narrow circular ducts is
adopted from the literature and is given below [37, 38]
                                           s
                              kw =k×          γ− (γ− 1)ϕh
                                           s          ϕv    ,                                   (36)
                              zw =z×                     1
                                              ϕv(γ− (γ− 1)ϕh),                             (37)
where
                                          z =ρc,                                                     (38)

                                        ϕh =−J2(kva)J0(kva),                                         (39)

                                        ϕv =−J2(kha)J0(kha),                                         (40)

and                                            s
                                        kv =      −jωρ
                                               r     µ  ,                                            (41)
                                        kh =      −jωρcp
                                                      K  .                                         (42)

                                                 17
Here,ρ is the density,µ is the coefficient of dynamic viscosity,cp is the specific
heat  at  constant  pressure, K  is  the  thermal  conductivity, γ  is  the  specific
heat ratio, kv  and kh  are the viscous and thermal boundary wavenumbers,
respectively.  The validity of the model is subject to some assumptions which
are stated in Appendix  D. The values of the properties mentioned above for
air under normal temperature and pressure (NTP) conditions are tabulated
in Table 4 [39].

                         Table 4:  Properties of air at 20◦C and 1 atm.

      Sl.  No.                         Parameter                                  Value
           1        Density (ρ)                                                 1.225 kg/m3
           2        Coefficient of dynamic viscosity (µ)         1.8×10−5 Pa.s
           3        Specific heat at constant pressure (cp)       1007 J/kg.K
           4        Thermal conductivity (K)                      0.02476 W/m.K
           5        Specific heat ratio (γ)                                       1.4























Figure 7: Acoustic pressure in a uniform duct with narrow tube effects:                  true solution,
        predicted solution.

    Figure  7  shows  both  real  and  imaginary  parts  of  the  acoustic  pressure
obtained  from  the  neural  network  (predicted  solution)  in  comparison  with
the analytical solution (true solution, which can be obtained by replacing k

                                                  18
with kw, c with cw  = ω/kw, and ρ with ρw  = zw/cw  in Appendix   B). The
corresponding relative errors are reported in Table 5.  It can be observed that
the  neural network  is able  to  learn the  underlying  physics  associated  with
both the real and imaginary parts of the equations simultaneously.

Table  5:  Relative  error  between  predicted  and  true  solution  for  the  uniform  duct  with
narrow-tube effects

                   Frequency (Hz)    δpreal      δpimag
                           500             1.5225×10−6    2.6168×10−6
                          1000            5.6833×10−6    8.6038×10−6
                          1500            3.8647×10−5    3.1351×10−5
                          2000            5.4766×10−4    2.4609×10−4


3.4.  Particle velocity estimation
    Besides acoustic pressure, it is essential to estimate the particle velocity
to calculate the acoustic performance parameters of a system.  This can be
done using the momentum equation which gives the relationship between the
acoustic pressure and particle velocity.
    In the absence of mean flow, the momentum equation results in [23]
                                        u =−  1       dp
                                                jωρ  dx.                                          (43)
If the expression ofp is known, it is trivial to estimate the particle velocity by
analytical means.  The neural network formulation offers a similar advantage.
The network trained for the acoustic pressure  ˆpt(x(i);θ) can be easily differ-
entiated using automatic differentiation approach and the particle velocity
can be estimated as follows
                            ˆut(x(i);θ) =−  1         d
                                              jωρ  dx(i) ˆpt(x(i);θ).                           (44)
Note here that the subscript t which is used to represent the trial solution
approach is carry forwarded to the particle velocity as its estimation is based
on the acoustic pressure obtained using the same approach.  The results thus
obtained for the uniform duct are compared against those of the analytical
method for 500 Hz in Fig. 8.  It can be observed that the predicted results
are in good agreement with those of the true solution.  Note here that since

                                               19
the  acoustic  pressure  is  a  real-valued  function,  according  to  Eq.  (43),  the
real-part of the particle velocity will be zero and the imaginary part is shown
in Fig. 8.

















Figure  8:   Particle  velocity  in  a  uniform  duct  without  mean  flow:          true  solution,
       predicted solution.

    It is trivial to estimate the particle velocity from the acoustic pressure
in the absence of mean flow.  However, when the mean flow is present, the
momentum equation results in [40]

                                jkuw +Mduw                    dpw
                                               dx  =− 1ρc      dx ,                                (45)
where M  is the mean flow Mach number and the subscript w  denotes the
complex-valued quantities.  In this case, estimation of the particle velocity is
not a straightforward process due to the presence of gradient terms associated
with the particle velocity.  Problems of this category can be solved using the
transfer learning technique [26, 27, 28, 29].  According to this technique, the
estimates of the acoustic pressure at discrete points ˆpt(x(i);θ) will be used to
train another neural network ˆut(x(i); ˜θ) such that it satisfies

               jkˆut(x(i); ˜θ) +M d                                 d
                                     dx(i) ˆut(x(i); ˜θ) =− 1ρc   dx(i) ˆpt(x(i);θ).            (46)

This results in another unconstrained optimization problem:

                              min˜θ  Lu(x; ˜θ),  x∈ [x1,x2],                              (47)


                                                20
whereLu is the loss function associated with the momentum equation.  Since
the presence of mean flow makes the acoustic pressure a complex-valued, the
loss functionLu takes the form

                           Lu(x; ˜θ) =Lu,R(x; ˜θ) +Lu,I(x; ˜θ),                           (48)

where

                     NX M d                                                                  2
Lu,R(x; ˜θ) =  1                                                              d
                N   i=1       dx(i) ˆut,R(x(i); ˜θ)−kˆut,I(x(i); ˜θ) +  1ρc dx(i) ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)  2,
                                                                                            (49)
                     NX M d                                                                  2
Lu,I(x; ˜θ) =  1                                                              d
                N   i=1       dx(i) ˆut,I(x(i); ˜θ) +kˆut,R(x(i); ˜θ) +  1ρcdx(i) ˆpt,I(x(i);θ)  2.
                                                                                            (50)

Here,  ˆut,R  and  ˆut,I  are the real and imaginary parts of the particle velocity
ˆut.  The neural network formulation to predict the complex-valued acoustic
pressure  ˆpt(x(i);θ) is given in Appendix   E. It is worth noting here that in
the absence of mean flow,  both the acoustic pressure and particle velocity
share common network parameters,  whereas in the presence of mean flow,
they will have a different set of parameters.  These parameters can be saved,
and the networks can be reconstructed at later points of time to calculate
other variables such as acoustic impedance, intensity, power, etc.
    Figure  9  shows  the  comparison  of  the  real  and  imaginary  parts  of  the
particle  velocity  in  a  uniform  duct  at  500  Hz  and M  =  0.2  against  the
analytical solution.  Refer to Appendix   F for the analytical solution.  Here,
the predictions of the neural network are obtained using the same architecture
and optimization parameters mentioned in Table 1.  The results reveal that
the newly constructed network is able to predict the particle velocity from
the existing network associated with the acoustic pressure successfully using
the transfer learning technique.
    One might be interested in finding the velocity potential (Φ) instead of
the particle velocity (u).  In such cases, u and uw  in Eqs. (43) and (45) can
be replaced with the dΦ/dx and dΦw/dx, and the velocity potential can be
found from the acoustic pressure fields p and pw, respectively.
    It should be noted here that the accuracy of the particle velocity (or the
velocity potential) strongly depends on the accuracy of the acoustic pressure


                                               21
Figure  9:  Particle  velocity  in  a  uniform  duct  with  a  mean  flow  of M  =  0.2:     true
solution,        predicted solution.

predictions.  Therefore, one must be diligent in predicting the acoustic pres-
sure.  Any error that occurs in the prediction of it will propagate into the
estimates of the particle velocity and subsequent variables.
    In a typical neural network formulation, the training variables mentioned
in Table 1 will have a strong influence on the training of the network.  Among
those mentioned, the activation function (σ) and the number of collocation
points (N) play a significant role in any physics-based neural network for-
mulation [31].  Choice of these variables based on the elementary knowledge
on the output of the neural network significantly reduces the computational
time and increases the accuracy.  The following sections will present a study
on the effect of these parameters while training a network to predict acoustic
pressure in a uniform duct in the absence of mean flow.

3.5.  Effect of activation function on the training process
    It is known that nonlinearity is introduced in the training process through
the  activation  function  [9,  22,  16].   In  many  physics-based  neural  network
formulations, the hyperbolic tangent is used as an activation function [9, 16].
However, it is not an ideal activation function for every problem.  A suitable
activation function for a particular neural network is purely problem specific.
One should choose an activation function that better represents the output
of the neural network.  This will significantly reduce the computational time,
and increase accuracy within chosen number of iterations.  To demonstrate
this, three activation functions, namely, hyperbolic tangent, sine, and cosine
are considered.


                                               22
Figure 10:  Loss function with respect to iterations for different activation functions at 500
Hz.

    Figure  10  shows  the  comparison  of  the  loss  functions  with  respect  to
iterations for the three activation functions at 500 Hz.  It can be seen that
the functions sine and cosine are performing better as compared to hyperbolic
tangent  function.  For example,  tanh  requires approximately 400 iterations
to reach a chosen threshold loss value of 5×10−3, whereas sin and cos require
half the iterations to reach the same value.  It is due to the fact that both the
activation function and the neural network output are sinusoidal in nature.
    Table 6 shows the relative errors for each activation function.  The results
indicate that both sin  and cos  activations offer more accurate results com-
pared to tanh within the chosen number of iterations (1200).  Among sin and
cos,  the former activation function helps to reduce the loss function faster
compared to the latter.  Therefore,  sin  is chosen as an activation function
throughout this work.

           Table 6:  Relative errors with different activation functions at 500 Hz

                          Activation function     δp
                                     sin                  4.2369×10−4
                                     cos                 2.4916×10−4
                                    tanh               17.0210×10−4






                                                23
3.6.  Effect of number of data points on the training process
    The choice of number of collocation points inside the domain significantly
effects the training process, thence the accuracy of the solution.  Unlike other
problems, the required number of collocation points in acoustic problems de-
pends on the frequency.  The number of points appropriate for a particular
frequency may not be adequate for another frequency.  Figure 11a shows the
loss  function  with  respect  to  iterations  for  different  frequencies  and  collo-
cation points.  It can be observed that 7000 points are sufficient to reduce
the  loss  function  at  1500  Hz  to  a  sufficiently  low  value,  whereas  they  are
insufficient at 2000 Hz.  The network requires double the number of points.














Figure 11:  Effect of number of data points on the training process:  (a) Loss function with
respect to iterations for different number of data points, (b) gradient of acoustic pressure
at low and high frequencies.

    The  accuracy  of  a  neural  network  solution  depends  on  how  accurately
the network is able to estimate the gradient of the variable being predicted
with respect to the input variable.  In the current work, estimation ofdp/dx.
Figure 11b shows the gradient of the acoustic pressure at 1500 Hz and 2000
Hz.  It can be observed that the gradients at 2000 Hz are higher as compared
to  those  at  1500  Hz.   In  other  words,  within  the  chosen  subdomain,  say
∆x∈ [0, 1], the acoustic pressure variations are higher for 2000 Hz compared
to  1500  Hz.   Hence,  the  network  needs  finer  spatial  resolution  at  2000  Hz
as compared to 1500 Hz, to capture the variations in the acoustic pressure
accurately.  This requirement is not just attributed to high-frequency analy-
sis.  Accurate pressure predictions at near-resonance/natural frequency also
require higher spatial resolution.
    For the uniform duct configuration considered in the current study, reso-



                                                24
Figure  12:   Effect  of  number  of  data  points  on  the  training  process  at  near-resonance
frequency:  (a) Loss function with respect to iterations as frequency approaches to reso-
nance frequency, (b) gradient of acoustic pressure as frequency approaches to resonance
frequency.

nance occurs when sin(kL) = 0, i.e., at the frequencies

                                            fn = ncL,                                              (51)

where fn is the natural frequency, L is the length of the duct and n = 1, 2,
3,..., so on.  Figure 12 demonstrates the effect of the number of collocation
points on the training process near one of these resonance frequencies (1020
Hz).   Figure  12a  shows  the  variation  of  the  loss  function  as  the  frequency
approaches the resonance frequency from the low frequency side.  For 900 Hz
and 950 Hz, which are away from 1020 Hz by 120 Hz and 70 Hz, respectively,
6000 - 8000 collocation points are enough for the network to reduce the loss
function to a sufficiently low value within 1000 iterations.  As the frequency
approaches  the  resonance  frequency  (1000  Hz  and  1010  Hz),  the  network
needs almost double the number of points to reduce the loss function to a
sufficiently low value. Figure 12b shows the corresponding pressure gradients.
From the results, it is evident that as the analysis frequency approaches one of
the resonance/natural frequencies, the acoustic pressure gradients drastically
increases  and  the  network  needs  finer  spatial  resolution  to  capture  these
gradients to satisfy the governing differential equation.








                                                25
4.  Conclusion

    Predicting  acoustic  pressure  in  the  frequency  domain  using  the  neural
network method is a challenging task due to the vanishing gradient problem.
In addition, prediction of a complex-valued acoustic field is not a straight-
forward  process,  as  existing  algorithms  perform  optimization  only  on  the
real-valued  functions.   These  two  challenges  are  addressed  in  the  current
paper with examples from plane wave acoustic theory.  The vanishing gra-
dient  problem  is  circumvented  by  constructing  a  trial  neural  network  that
always  satisfies  the  boundary  conditions  prior  to  training.   The  complex-
valued  acoustic  field  is  predicted  by  splitting  the  governing  equations  and
the boundary conditions into real and imaginary parts and training the net-
work to identify shared parameters that satisfy both parts simultaneously.
    Research findings reveal that a single neural network architecture is ca-
pable of predicting acoustic field in a uniform duct with visco-thermal and
convective  mean  flow  effects  with  a  maximum  error  of  the  orderO(10−4).
The same network architecture is able to predict the acoustic field in a grad-
ually  varying  cross-sectional  area  duct  with  a  maximum  error  ofO(10−3).
The study further reveals the following

  (a)Through the transfer learning, particle velocity and other parameters
       can be estimated easily.

 (b)In the case of frequency domain acoustics, the number of collocation
       points required to train a network successfully is inversely proportional
       to  the  iterations.   In  other  words,  a  network  with  fewer  number  of
       input collocation points requires more iterations than the network with
       adequate number of input collocation points.

  (c)The  network  needs  finer  spatial  resolution  at  higher  frequencies  and
       near-resonance frequencies to accurately capture the spatial variation
       of the acoustic field.

    These  observations  are  not  just  limited  to  plane  wave  duct  acoustics.
They are applicable to problems in higher-dimensional spaces such as in the
prediction of the acoustic field in 2D and 3D geometries.  The ability of a
single neural network architecture to predict the acoustic field in a wide range
of problems will lead to the development of meshless acoustic solvers, which
can be deployed on open platforms in the near future.


                                               26
Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgments
    The authors acknowledge the support received from the Department of
Science and Technology, and Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB),
Government of India towards this research.

Appendix  A.  Illustration of bias towards one of the loss functions
                     while training a neural network
    Let us consider a problem of solving one-dimensional Helmholtz equation
to predict the acoustic pressure in a uniform duct of length 1 m:
                           d2
                            dx2 +k2       p(x) = 0,   x∈ [0, 1]                        (A.1)

subjected to the boundary conditions

                                         p(0) = 1,                                            (A.2a)
                                         p(1) =−1.                                         (A.2b)

According to Raissi et al.  [9],  the loss function to be minimized to obtain
the neural network approximation for the acoustic pressure,  ˆp(x;θ), can be
written as follows
                              L(x;θ) =Ld(x;θ) +Lb(x;θ),                             (A.3)
i.e., λj = 1, j = 1, 2 in Eq. (9), and

                           NdX           d                                     2
       Ld(x;θ) =   1               d                         +k2ˆp(x(i);θ)
                      Nd  i=1    dx(i)    dx(i) ˆp(x(i);θ)                     2,          (A.4)

                           NbX ˆp(x(i);θ)−p(x(i))2
        Lb(x;θ) =   1Nb                                 2.                                      (A.5)
                          i=1
To minimizeL,  a feedforward neural network with 5 hidden layers and 90
neurons  in  each  hidden  layer  is  constructed.   The  domain  is  divided  into
14000 random collocation points apart from the two boundary points.  The

                                              27
optimization is performed using L-BFGS optimizer with sin activation func-
tion.  A total of 14000 iterations were performed with an optimal tolerance
of 10−3.
    Figure A.13 shows the comparison of the acoustic pressure obtained from
the  predictions  of  the  neural  network  (predicted  solution)  and  the  analyt-
ical  method  (true  solution).   It  can  be  observed  that  at  lower  frequencies
(500 Hz),  the results from both methods are in good agreement with each
other.  As the frequency increases, the neural network is unable to learn the
underlying physics from the governing equation, which ultimately results in
bad  correlation.   The  reason  for  this  behavior  can  best  be  understood  by
observing the individual loss functions and their gradients.

















Figure  A.13:   Acoustic  pressure  in  a  uniform  duct  with λj   =  1:         true  solution,
       predicted solution.

    Figure A.14 shows the comparison of individual loss functions with re-
spect to iterations at different frequencies.  It can be seen that the loss func-
tions associated with the differential equation (Ld) reduce to zero for both
frequencies.  However, the loss function associated with the boundary condi-
tions (Lb) does not reduce and becomes stagnant at a particular value with
a high frequency.  This indicates that the training process is biased towards
Ld at higher frequencies.
    Figure A.15 shows the histograms of the gradients calculated at the last
hidden layer of the network in the last iteration for the two frequencies.  It
can be observed that at higher frequencies (1000 Hz), the gradients ofLb are
concentrated at zero, while the gradient ofLd are evenly distributed.  Since
most of the gradients ofLb are in the neighborhood of zero, they will vanish

                                               28
      Figure A.14:  Loss functions with respect to iterations for different frequencies

during  backpropagation.   This  causes  the  training  process  to  bias  towards
minimizingLd, leavingLb, at higher frequencies.



















                          Figure A.15:  Histograms of loss gradients

    Algorithms are proposed that update the Lagrange multiplier such that
the  vanishing  gradient  problem  is  circumvented  [16,  14,  22,  15].   However,
most of these algorithms require manual tuning of the hyperparameter(s) for
each frequency.  For instance, Eq. (A.6) shows a popular λj  update rule in
which λj  at iteration τ + 1 is updated based on the value of λj  and  ˆλj  at



                                                29
iteration τ  [22, 15]:

                          λj(τ + 1) =αλj(τ) + (1−α)ˆλj(τ).                        (A.6)

Here,  ˆλi(τ) is updated based on the statistical parameters calculated from
the gradients of individual loss functions. α is a user-defined hyperparameter
that decides the contribution ofλj from the current iteration towards the next
iteration.  This hyperparameter requires manual tuning for each frequency
considered in the analysis.

Appendix  B.  Analytical solution for the acoustic pressure distri-
                     bution in a uniform duct
    The acoustic pressure in a uniform duct can be obtained by solving 1-D
Helmholtz equation [33]
                         d2
                          dx2 +k2      p(x) = 0,   x∈ [x1, x2],                     (B.1)

subjected to the boundary conditions

                               p(x1) =p1;   p(x2) =p2.                              (B.2)

Since the governing differential equation is homogeneous, it can be treated as
a eigenvalue problem and can be solved by assuming the pressure distribution
of the form
                                        p(x) =Ceλx,                                          (B.3)
where λ is an eigenvalue.  Upon substituting Eq. (B.3) in Eq. (B.1) yields
the solution
                            p(x) =C1 cos(kx) +C2 sin(kx),                           (B.4)
where C1 and C2 are constants which can be calculated from the boundary
conditions.
    Upon substituting the boundary conditions in Eq. (B.4),  the constants
can be obtained as

                            C1 = p1 sin(kx2)−p2 sin(kx1)sin(k(x2−x1))   ,                            (B.5)

                            C2 = p1 cos(kx2)−p2 cos(kx1)sin(k(x1−x2))   .                           (B.6)


                                              30
    The particle velocity u(x) can be calculated using the momentum equa-
tion (Eq. (43)) as follows

                        u(x) =− jρc [C1 sin(kx)−C2 cos(kx)].                      (B.7)










































                                              31
Appendix  C.  Pseudocode  to  calculate  pressure  distribution  in  a
                    gradually varying cross-sectional area duct using bvp4c
Require: x1,x2,p1,p2,S0,S1,S2,k,Nt
 1: x← linspace(x1,x2,Nt)

    /*  Function  to  predict  the  acoustic  pressure  */
 2:  function pressure
 3:   sol← bvp4c(ODEFCN,BCFCN,INITSOL)
 4:   p←sol(:, 1)                ▷ 1st  column:= p;  2nd  column:= p′
 5:  end function

    /*  Function  to  calculate p  and p′  */
 6:  function odefcn(x, y,S0,S1,S2,k)
 7:   S←S0 +S1x +S2x2
 8:   S′←S1 + 2S2x
 9:      y← [y1;  y2]      ▷ y1  and y2  represents p  and p′,  respectively.
10:      y′← [y2; −S′y2/S−k2y1]
11:  end function

    /*  Function  to  calculate  difference  in  boundary  values  */
12:  function bcfcn(y,x1,x2,p1,p2)
13:      yb← [y1(x1)−p1;  y1(x2)−p2]
14:  end function

    /*  Function  to  initialize p  and p′  */
15:  function initsol(x, y)
16:      y0← [sin(x);    cos(x)]
17:  end function












                                            32
Appendix  D.  Assumptions for the validity of complex-valued wavenum-
                    ber kw
    The validity of the complex-valued wavenumber adopted from the litera-
ture is subjected to the following assumptions [25, 37, 38]

    •  Acoustic  wavelength  should  be  much  larger  than  the  boundary  layer
       thickness, i.e., viscous and thermal wavenumbers must be much larger
       than the acoustic wavenumber
                                     kv
                                     k >> 1;  khk >> 1.                              (D.1)

    •  The cross-section of the duct must be much smaller than the acoustic
       wavelength so that the plane wave theory is valid

    •  The cross-section of the duct must be constant or at most slowly varying
       in the direction of sound propagation

    •  The length of the duct in the propagation direction must be larger than
       the boundary layer thickness, i.e.,

                                     L>>δv;  L>>δh,                               (D.2)

       where                           r                s
                                 δv =     2µ                2K
                                          ωρ;  δh =        ωρcp,                          (D.3)
       are the viscous and thermal boundary layer thicknesses, respectively
These assumptions can be easily verified for the medium properties and duct
configuration considered in Section 3.3.

Appendix  E.  Neural network formulation to predict the complex-
                    valued  acoustic  pressure  in  a  uniform  duct  in  the
                    presence of mean flow
    The acoustic pressure in a uniform duct in the presence of mean flow can
be obtained by solving [40, 34]

        (1−M 2) d2dx2− 2jMk ddx +k2           pw(x) = 0,   x∈ [x1,x2],         (E.1)


                                             33
whereM =U/c is the mean flow Mach number,U is the mean flow velocity,
and j =√−1.
    The presence of an additional gradient term due to the mean flow makes
the acoustic pressure a complex-valued function.  Following the approach in
Section  2.3,  Eq.  (E.1)  along  with  the  boundary  conditions  Eqs.  (21a)  and
(21b),  produces  two  sets  of  equations.   One  set  for  the  real-part  and  the
other set for the imaginary-part of the acoustic pressure.  The corresponding
optimization problem can be constructed as

                      minθ  LR(x;θ) +LI(x;θ),  x∈ [x1,x2],                    (E.2)

whereLR andLI are the loss functions associated with the real and imaginary
parts, respectively.  They can be calculated as

                     NX  (1−M 2) d        d
  LR(x;θ) =  1N                       dx(i)    dx(i) ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)
                    i=1
                                                                                    2
                                  + 2Mk ddx(i) ˆpt,I(x(i);θ) +k2ˆpt,R(x(i);θ)
                                                                                    2,   (E.3)


                    NX  (1−M 2) d         d
  LI(x;θ) =  1N                      dx(i)    dx(i) ˆpt,I(x(i);θ)
                    i=1
                                                                                    2
                                  − 2Mk ddx(i) ˆpt,R(x(i);θ) +k2ˆpt,I(x(i);θ)
                                                                                    2.   (E.4)
Here,  ˆpt,R and  ˆpt,I  are the trial solutions associated with the real and imag-
inary parts of the acoustic pressure, respectively, and can be constructed as
in Eqs. (24) and (25).

Appendix  F.  Analytical solution for the complex-valued acoustic
                    pressure in a uniform duct in the presence of mean
                    flow
    Since Eq. (E.1) is an ordinary differential equation with constant coef-
ficients,  by following the similar procedure as in Appendix   B, the general
solution can be obtained as

                           pw(x) =Cw,1e−jk+c x +Cw,2ejk−c x,                           (F.1)

                                              34
wherek+c  =k/(1+M) andk−c  =k/(1−M) are the convective wavenumbers.
The constants Cw,1 and Cw,2 can be obtained from the boundary conditions
(Eqs. (21a) and (21b)) as follows


                          Cw,1 =    p1ejk−c x2−p2ejk+c x1ej(k−c x2−k+c x1)−ej(k−c x1−k+c x2),                        (F.2)

                          Cw,2 =   p1e−jk+c x2−p2e−jk+c x1ej(k−c x1−k+c x2)−ej(k−c x2−k+c x1).                        (F.3)

Here, the boundary values p1 and p2 can be purely real or complex valued.
    The particle velocity uw can be assumed to take the form as

                            uw(x) =Dw,1e−jk+c x +Dw,2ejk−c x,                          (F.4)

and  the  constants Dw,1  and Dw,2  can  be  calculated  from  the  momentum
equation (Eq. (45)) as [23]

                                       Dw,1 = Cw,1ρc ,                                           (F.5)

                                       Dw,2 =−Cw,2ρc .                                        (F.6)


References
 [1]B.  S.  Wang,  Z.  C.  He,  Crack  detection  of  arch  dam  using  statistical
      neural network based on the reductions of natural frequencies, J. Sound
      Vib. 302 (4-5) (2007) 1037–1047.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.
      2007.01.008.

 [2]O.  Janssens,  V.  Slavkovikj,  B.  Vervisch,  K.  Stockman,  M.  Loccufier,
      S. Verstockt, R. V. de Walle, S. V. Hoecke, Convolutional neural network
      based fault detection for rotating machinery, J. Sound Vib. 377 (2016)
      331–345.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2016.05.027.

 [3]Z.  Lai,  C.  Mylonas,  S.  Nagarajaiah,  E.  Chatzi,  Structural  identifica-
      tion  with  physics-informed  neural  ordinary  differential  equations,  J.
      Sound  Vib.  508  (2021)  116196.    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.
      2021.116196.



                                               35
 [4]J. H. Park, J. T. Kim, D. S. Hong, D. D. Ho, J. H. Yi, Sequential damage
     detection approaches for beams using time-modal features and artificial
     neural networks, J. Sound Vib. 323 (1-2) (2009) 451–474. https://doi.
     org/10.1016/j.jsv.2008.12.023.
 [5]O. Abdeljaber, O. Avci, S. Kiranyaz, M. Gabbouj, D. J. Inman, Real-
     time vibration-based structural damage detection using one-dimensional
     convolutional  neural  networks,  J.  Sound  Vib.  388  (2017)  154–170.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2016.10.043.

 [6]S.  Sack,  M.      ˚Abom,  Acoustic  plane-wave  decomposition  by  means  of
     multilayer perceptron neural networks, J. Sound Vib. 486 (2020) 115518.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2020.115518.
 [7]A.  Alguacil,  M.  Bauerheim,  M.  C.  Jacob,  S.  Moreau,  Predicting  the
     propagation of acoustic waves using deep convolutional neural networks,
     J. Sound Vib. 512 (2021) 116285.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.
     2021.116285.
 [8]de Silva, M. Brian, D. M. Higdon, S. L. Brunton, J. N. Kutz, Discovery
     of  physics  from  data:   Universal  laws  and  discrepancies,  Front.  Artif.
     Intell. 3 (2020) 25.  https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2020.00025.
 [9]M.  Raissi,  P.  Perdikaris,  G.  E.  Karniadakis,  Physics-informed  neural
     networks:  A  deep  learning  framework  for  solving  forward  and  inverse
     problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, J. Comput.
     Phys.  378  (2019)  686–707.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.
     10.045.

[10]F.  Ihlenburg,  I.  Babuˇska,  Finite  element  solution  of  the  Helmholtz
     equation  with  high  wave  number  Part  1:  The  h-version  of  the  FEM,
     Comput. Math. Appl. 30 (9) (1995) 9–37.  https://doi.org/10.1016/
     0898-1221(95)00144-N.
[11]L. Shen, Y. Liu, An adaptive fast multipole boundary element method
     for  three-dimensional  acoustic  wave  problems  based  on  the  Burton–
     Miller formulation, Comput. Mech. 40 (2007) 461–472.  https://doi.
     org/10.1007/s00466-006-0121-2.
[12]E. van’t Wout, S. R. Haqshenas, P. G´elat, T. Betcke, N. Saffari, Bench-
     marking  preconditioned  boundary  integral  formulations  for  acoustics,

                                             36
     Int.  J.  Numer.  Methods  Eng.  122  (20)  (2021)  5873–5897.     https:
     //doi.org/10.1002/nme.6777.

[13]J.-M. Lourier, M. Di Domenico, B. Noll, M. Aigner, Implementation of
     an efficient pressure-based CFD solver for accurate thermoacoustic com-
     putations,  in:  33rd AIAA Aeroacoust. Conf.,  Colorado Springs,  USA,
     2012, p. 2089.  https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2012-2089.

[14]R.  van  der  Meer,  C.  W.  Oosterlee,  A.  Borovykh,  Optimally  weighted
     loss functions for solving PDEs with neural networks, J. Comput. Appl.
     Math.  405  (2022)  113887.    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2021.
     113887.

[15]S.  Maddu,  D.  Sturm,  C.  L.  M¨uller,  I.  F.  Sbalzarini,  Inverse  Dirichlet
     weighting enables reliable training of physics informed neural networks,
     Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 3 (1) (2022) 015026.  https://doi.org/10.
     1088/2632-2153/ac3712.

[16]S.  Basir,  I.  Senocak,  Physics  and  equality  constrained  artificial  neu-
     ral networks:  Application to forward and inverse problems with multi-
     fidelity  data  fusion,  J.  Comput.  Phys.  463  (2022)  111301.    https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111301.

[17]M.  Baymani,  S.  Effati,  H.  Niazmand,  A.  Kerayechian,  Artificial  neu-
     ral  network  method  for  solving  the  Navier–Stokes  equations,  Neu-
     ral  Comput.  Appl.  26  (2015)  765–773.    https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s00521-014-1762-2.

[18]J. Oldenburg, F. Borowski, A.       ¨Oner, K. Schmitz, M. Stiehm, Geometry
     aware  physics  informed  neural  network  surrogate  for  solving  Navier–
     Stokes equation (GAPINN), Adv. Model. Simul. Eng. Sci. 9 (8) (2022)
     1–15.  https://doi.org/10.1186/s40323-022-00221-z.

[19]C. A. Amalinadhi, S. Pramudita, R. Stevenson, L. Zuhal, On physics-
     informed deep learning for solving Navier-Stokes equations,  in:  AIAA
     SCITECH 2022 Forum, San Diego, USA, 2022, p. 1436.  https://doi.
     org/10.2514/6.2022-1436.

[20]T.  Alkhalifah,  C.  Song,  U.  B.  Waheed,  Q.  Hao,  Wavefield  solutions
     from machine learned functions constrained by the Helmholtz equation,


                                             37
     Artif.  Intell.  Geosci.  2  (2021)  11–19.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
     aiig.2021.08.002.

[21]C. Song, T. Alkhalifah, U. B. Waheed, A versatile framework to solve
     the  Helmholtz  equation  using  physics-informed  neural  networks,  Geo-
     phys.  J.  Int.  228  (3)  (2022)  1750–1762.   https://doi.org/10.1093/
     gji/ggab434.

[22]S.  Wang,  Y.  Teng,  P.  Perdikaris,  Understanding  and  mitigating  gra-
     dient  flow  pathologies  in  physics-informed  neural  networks,  SIAM  J.
     Sci. Comput. 43 (5) (2021) A3055–A3081. https://doi.org/10.1137/
     20M1318043.

[23]M. Munjal, Acoustics of Ducts and Mufflers, 2nd Edition, John Wiley
     and Sons Ltd., West Sussex, UK, 2014.

[24]M. A. Pillai, D. D. Ebenezer, E. Deenadayalan, Transfer matrix anal-
     ysis of a duct with gradually varying arbitrary cross-sectional area, J.
     Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  146  (6)  (2019)  4435–4445.    https://doi.org/10.
     1121/1.5139412.

[25]J. Allard, N. Atalla, Propagation of Sound in Porous Media:  Modelling
     Sound  Absorbing  Materials,  2nd  Edition,  John  Wiley  and  Sons  Ltd.,
     West Sussex, UK, 2009.  https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470747339.

[26]S.   Desai,   M.   Mattheakis,   H.   Joy,   P.   Protopapas,   S.   Roberts,
     One-shot   transfer   learning   of   physics-informed   neural   networks,
     arXiv:2110.11286v2   (2022)   1–14https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
     2110.11286.

[27]Y.  Gao,  K.  C.  Cheung,  M.  K.  Ng,  SVD-PINNs:  Transfer  learning  of
     physics-informed neural networks via singular value decomposition, in:
     2022  IEEE  Symp.  Series  Comput.  Intell.,  Singapore,  2022,  pp.  1443–
     1450.  https://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI51031.2022.10022281.

[28]R.  Pellegrin,  B.  Bullwinkel,  M.  Mattheakis,  P.  Protopapas,  Transfer
     learning with physics-informed neural networks for efficient simulation
     of  branched  flows,  arXiv:2211.00214  (2022)  1–5https://doi.org/10.
     48550/arXiv.2211.00214.



                                             38
[29]C. Xu, B. T. Cao, Y. Yuan, G. Meschke, Transfer learning based physics-
     informed  neural  networks  for  solving  inverse  problems  in  engineering
     structures  under  different  loading  scenarios,  Comput.  Methods  Appl.
     Mech.  Eng.  405  (2023)  115852.    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
     2022.115852.

[30]K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, H. White, Multilayer feedforward networks
     are universal approximators, Neural Netw. 2 (5) (1989) 359–366. https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8.

[31]D.  V.  Dung,  N.  D.  Song,  P.  S.  Palar,  L.  R.  Zuhal,  On  the  choice  of
     activation functions in physics-informed neural network for solving in-
     compressible  fluid  flows,  in:   AIAA  SCITECH  2023  Forum,  National
     Harbor, Maryland, USA, 2023, p. 1803. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
     2023-1803.

[32]I.  E.  Lagaris,  A.  Likas,  D.  I.  Fotiadis,  Artificial  neural  networks  for
     solving ordinary and partial differential equations, IEEE Trans. Neural
     Netw. 9 (5) (1998) 987–1000.  https://doi.org/10.1109/72.712178.

[33]P. M. Morse, K. U. Ingard, Theoretical Acoustics, 1st Edition, Princeton
     University Press, New Jersey, 1986.

[34]S. R. Yeddula,  A. S. Morgans,  A semi-analytical solution for acoustic
     wave propagation in varying area ducts with mean flow, J. Sound Vib.
     492 (2021) 115770.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2020.115770.

[35]V.  H.  Gupta,  V.  Easwaran,  M.  L.  Munjal,  A  modified  segmentation
     approach  for  analyzing  plane  wave  propagation  in  non-uniform  ducts
     with mean flow, J. Sound Vib. 182 (5) (1995) 697–707.  https://doi.
     org/10.1006/jsvi.1995.0227.

[36]X. Wang, X. Sun, A new segmentation approach for sound propagation
     in non-uniform lined ducts with mean flow, J. Sound Vib. 330 (10) (2011)
     2369–2387.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2010.11.022.

[37]H.   Tijdeman,   On   the   propagation   of   sound   waves   in   cylindrical
     tubes, J. Sound Vib. 39 (1) (1975) 1–33.  https://doi.org/10.1016/
     S0022-460X(75)80206-9.



                                             39
[38]M. R. Stinson, The propagation of plane sound waves in narrow and wide
     circular tubes,  and generalization to uniform tubes of arbitrary cross-
     sectional  shape,  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  89  (2)  (1991)  550–558.   https:
     //doi.org/10.1121/1.400379.

[39]E. W. Lemmon, R. T. Jacobsen, S. G. Penoncello, D. G. Friend, Thermo-
     dynamic properties of air and mixtures of nitrogen, argon, and oxygen
     from 60 to 2000 K at pressures to 2000 MPa, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data
     29 (3) (2000) 331–385.  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1285884.

[40]J. Li, A. S. Morgans, The one-dimensional acoustic field in a duct with
     arbitrary mean axial temperature gradient and mean flow, J. Sound Vib.
     400 (2017) 248–269.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2017.03.047.
































                                             40