                 Approximate contraction of arbitrary tensor networks with
                 a flexible and efficient density matrix algorithm

                 Linjian Ma1, Matthew T. Fishman2, E. M. Stoudenmire2, and Edgar Solomonik1




                 1Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

                 2Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, New York, New York 10010, USA



                             Tensor network contractions are widely used in statistical physics, quantum com-
                        puting, and computer science.  We introduce a method to efficiently approximate tensor
                        network contractions using low-rank approximations, where each intermediate tensor
                        generated during the contractions is approximated as a low-rank binary tree tensor net-
                        work.  The proposed algorithm has the flexibility to incorporate a large portion of the
                        environment when performing low-rank approximations, which can lead to high accu-
                        racy for a given rank.  Here, the environment refers to the remaining set of tensors in the
                        network, and low-rank approximations with larger environments can generally provide
                        higher accuracy.  For contracting tensor networks defined on lattices, the proposed al-
                        gorithm can be viewed as a generalization of the standard boundary-based algorithms.
                        In addition, the algorithm includes a cost-efficient density matrix algorithm for approx-
                        imating a tensor network with a general graph structure into a tree structure, whose
                        computational cost is asymptotically upper-bounded by that of the standard algorithm
                        that uses canonicalization.  Experimental results indicate that the proposed technique
                        outperforms previously proposed approximate tensor network contraction algorithms
                        for multiple problems in terms of both accuracy and efficiency.


                 1    Introduction

                 A  tensor  network  [58, 80]  uses  a  set  of  (small)  tensors,  where  some  or  all  of  their  modes  are
                 contracted  according  to  some  pattern,  to  implicitly  represent  the  structure  of  high-dimensional
                 tensors that are expensive to form explicitly.  Tensor network techniques have been widely used
                 in computational quantum physics [80,78,81,79,70,68], where low-rank tensor networks can be
                 used to both represent Hamiltonians and quantum states.  These techniques are also applied in
                 multiple other applications, including quantum circuit simulation [61,29,62,49,83], data mining
                 via tensor methods [37,15], machine learning [73,65,42], and so on.
                     The tensor network contraction operation explicitly evaluates the single tensor represented by
                 a given tensor network, and it has multiple applications.  In quantum computing, each quantum
                 circuit execution can be viewed as a tensor network contraction, making this method a useful tool
                 for simulating quantum computers [49,83,62,61]. In statistical physics, tensor network contraction
                 has been used to evaluate the classical partition function of physical  models  defined on specific
                 graphs [40].  Tensor network contraction  has  also been used for counting satisfying assignments
                 of constraint satisfaction problems (#CSPs) [38].  In this approach, an arbitrary #CSP formula
                 is  transformed  into  a  tensor  network,  where  its  full  contraction  yields  the  number  of  satisfying

                 Linjian Ma:lma16@illinois.edu
                 Matthew T. Fishman:mfishman@flatironinstitute.org
                 E. M. Stoudenmire:mstoudenmire@flatironinstitute.org
                 Edgar Solomonik:solomon2@illinois.edu



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     1


Quantum
                  assignments of that formula.  Tensor network contraction is typically achieved through a sequence
                  of pairwise tensor contractions.  This sequence, known as the  contraction  path, is determined by
                  a topological sort of the underlying contraction tree.  The contraction tree is a rooted binary tree
                  that depicts the complete contraction of the tensor network.  In this tree, the leaves correspond to
                  the tensors in the network, and each internal vertex represents the tensor contraction of its two
                  children.
                       In the general case, contracting tensor networks with arbitrary structure is #P-hard because
                  of  the  potential  production  of  intermediate  tensors  with  high  orders  or  large  modes,  leading  to
                  significant computational costs for accurate contraction [16,56,8].  Nonetheless, in some applica-
                  tions such as many-body physics, it has been observed that tensor networks built on top of specific
                  models can often be approximately contracted with satisfactory accuracy, without incurring large
                  computational costs [57].













                                    (a) MPS                         (b) Binary tree tensor network                          (c) TTNS

                  Figure 1:  Illustration of the matrix product state (MPS), the (full) binary tree tensor network, and the tree tensor
                  network  state  (TTNS).  MPS  is  a  maximally-unbalanced  binary  tree  tensor  network  if  contracting  the  tensor  at
                  one end with its neighbor.  Both MPS and the binary tree tensor network are special cases of TTNS, where each
                  tensor has an order of at most 3.

                       A common approach to approximately contract a tensor network is to approximate large inter-
                  mediate tensors as (low-rank) tensor networks, which reduces the memory usage and computational
                  overhead for subsequent contractions. Widely used tensor networks for approximation including the
                  matrix product state (MPS [78], also called tensor train [59]), the binary tree tensor network [70],
                  and the tree tensor network state (TTNS) [55,54,22], which are visualized in Fig.1. For tensor net-
                  work contractions defined on regular structures, such as projected entangled pair states (PEPS)
                  with  2D  lattice  structures  [79, 78],  many  efficient  approximate  contraction  algorithms  based  on
                  MPS approximations [46,45] have been proposed.  However, many of these methods have not been
                  extended to other general tensor network structures.










                  Figure  2:   Illustration  of  the  approximate  contraction  technique  used  in  [35, 61, 14].    Each  intermediate  is
                  approximated as an MPS, which has an unbalanced binary tree structure.  The left diagram is the tensor diagram
                  of the input tensor network.  Each dashed box denotes the part of the tensor network that is approximated as an
                  MPS.

                       Recent works have proposed automated approximation algorithms for contracting tensor net-
                  works with more general graph structures [35,61,14,26,66,2], and many of these methods employ
                  low-rank approximation/truncation techniques.  In [35,61,14], each intermediate tensor produced
                  during the contraction is approximated as a binary tree tensor network, and we illustrate this ap-
                  proach in Fig.2.  In particular, [35] approximates each intermediate tensor as a general binary tree



                  Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     2


Quantum
                 tensor network, while the algorithm proposed in [61] called “contracting arbitrary tensor network”
                 (CATN) approximates each intermediate tensor as an MPS. When contracting two MPSs, CATN
                 swaps/permutes the modes that connect both MPSs to the boundaries.  Then, it contracts these
                 modes to obtain the output MPS. The adjacent mode swaps are the bottleneck for complexity in
                 CATN. In another algorithm proposed in [14] called “SweepContractor”, each intermediate tensor
                 is also approximated as an MPS, and the algorithm leverages an embedding of the tensor network
                 graph into 2D space to find an effective contraction path.
                     Several factors can significantly impact the efficiency and accuracy of the approximate tensor
                 network contraction process.  To begin with,  the choice of contraction path plays a crucial role.
                 Ref. [26] demonstrates that selecting different contraction paths using various heuristics can lead
                 to substantial variations in both runtime and accuracy for different problems.  Additionally,  for
                 both CATN [61] and SweepContractor [14], it is essential to carefully select the binary tree/MPS
                 structures and permutations (i.e.,  a mapping from tensor modes onto binary tree vertices) [41].
                 These choices should yield accurate low-rank approximations while enabling efficient subsequent
                 contractions.  However, previous works such as [35,61,14] have not systematically explored these
                 parts of the design space.
                     The low-rank truncation algorithm used to reduce the tensor size in approximate contraction
                 is another important factor.  Let M represent the part of the network that requires approxima-
                 tion,  and let E denote the remaining set of tensors in the network,  which is commonly referred
                 to as the  environment.  The optimal way to truncate is to minimize the global error by solving
                 minX∥EX− EM∥F  with the constraint that X has a specific low-rank tensor network structure,
                 where∥·∥F denotes the Frobenius norm.  Two standard algorithms for solving the low-rank approx-
                 imation problem are the canonicalization-based algorithm and the density matrix algorithm.  In
                 the canonicalization-based algorithm, one first performs a QR decomposition on E, Q, R← QR(E),
                 then updates X based on the low-rank approximation of QTM.  In the density matrix algorithm,
                 the leading eigenvectors of the density matrix (also called the Gram matrix/normal equations),
                 MTETEM,  is computed,  and X is computed by projecting M to the subspace spanned by the
                 leading eigenvectors.  Both algorithms have the same output but can have different computational
                 costs.
                     If the environment tensor network E contains a large number of tensors, minimizing the global
                 error could be computationally expensive.  In such cases, one typically resorts to minimizing the
                 local error by solving minX∥X− M∥F ,  or by replacing E with a smaller environment  ˆE so the
                 optimization problem is easier to solve.
                     Achieving a balance between accuracy and efficiency requires favoring different structures and
                 sizes of the environment  ˆE for different problems.  Hence, it becomes crucial to provide an auto-
                 mated tensor network contraction algorithm with the necessary flexibility to accommodate different
                 environments.  This flexibility enables the algorithm to adapt and optimize the contraction process
                 according to the specific requirements of each problem.
                     In  previous  studies  [61, 14],  the  selection  of  environments  was  implicitly  determined  by  the
                 algorithm.  For instance, in the CATN algorithm [61], truncation takes place during adjacent swaps
                 of MPS modes, with the environment consisting of all tensors in the target MPS. Similarly, the
                 SweepContractor algorithm [14] performs truncation while contracting an input MPS with a single
                 tensor, incorporating both the MPS and the tensor into the environment.  The method proposed in
                 [26] introduces user-specified environment sizes, and utilizes tree-structured environments       ˆE that
                 are constructed by including a spanning tree of tensors around the pair of tensors to be truncated.
                 Ref.   [26]  demonstrates  that  including  a  larger  environment  leads  to  more  accurate  contraction
                 results for multiple problems.  In this work, we generalize the strategies presented in the previous
                 works and propose a tensor network contraction algorithm that allows more flexible environment
                 incorporation.  For contracting tensor networks defined on lattices, the proposed strategy can be
                 viewed as a generalization of the standard boundary-based algorithms [79].






                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     3


Quantum
                  1.1    Our contributions
                  We propose a new approach,  partitoned                    contract, for performing approximate contractions of
                  arbitrary tensor networks. We illustrate the approach in Fig.4. This approach follows the technique
                  used in [35,61,14], where each intermediate tensor produced during the contraction is approxi-
                  mated as a binary tree tensor network.  Moreover, our approach is composed of the following two
                  novel components.














                                      (a) Complete contraction tree                  (b) Contraction tree on the partitioned network

                  Figure  3:  Illustration  of  different  contraction  trees.  Each  blue  vertex  denotes  a  tensor,  and  the  green  lines  and
                  dots  denote  the  binary  contraction  tree.   The  contraction  tree  visualization  has  been  adapted  from  [26].   In
                  (b),  each  dotted  box  denotes  a  partition  of  the  tensor  network.  The  partial  contraction  sequence  shown  in  (b)
                  corresponds to a standard left-to-right boundary MPS contraction [79].

                       First, unlike prior works [35,61,14,26] that contract the tensor network based on a                     complete
                  contraction tree with each leaf corresponding to a tensor in the network, our technique relies on
                  a  contraction  tree  of  parts  of  the  tensor  network,  which  is  a  partial  contraction  tree  and  each
                  leaf  vertex  corresponds  to  a  partition.   We  illustrate  complete  and  partial  contraction  trees  in
                  Fig.3.  In the algorithm, each low-rank approximation considers all tensors in the input partitions
                  as  the  environment,  thus  utilizing  a  larger  partition  means  using  a  larger  environment  and  can
                  potentially  lower  the  truncation  error.   In  practical  applications,  one  has  the  option  of  either
                  utilizing automated graph partitioning libraries like KaHyPar [67] and Metis [36] for partitioning
                  the tensor network, or manually selecting suitable partitions for specific problems.  In Section3.2.2,
                  we  will  demonstrate  how  the  utilization  of  the  partial  contraction  tree  abstraction  enables  the
                  straightforward  extension  of  various  contraction  algorithms  designed  for  2D  grids  with  different
                  environments, including those that have not been automated in the prior work [35,61,14,26].
                       Second,  we  provide  a  new  approach  to  approximate  a  given  tensor  network  into  a  binary
                  tree  structure,  as  depicted  in  Fig.4b.   This  approach  is  composed  of  the  following  three  novel
                  components.

                       •  It encompasses a new heuristic for generating binary tree structures and permutations (i.e.,
                          a mapping from tensor modes onto binary tree vertices [41]) of intermediate tensor networks.
                          The binary tree structure is also called the embedding tree in Fig.4band throughout the
                          paper.  Unlike previous studies that relied on arbitrary choices for such structures and permu-
                          tations, our approach takes into consideration the efficiency of subsequent contractions.  This
                          is  achieved  by  ensuring  that  the  embedding  tree  aligns  with  a  contraction  path-generated
                          tree, which imposes constraints on the adjacency relations of binary tree modes.  Moreover,
                          we ensure that the selected structure is similar to the given sub-tensor network by solving
                          a graph embedding problem that minimizes the congestion [33,9,52,7,51], allowing for an
                          accurate approximation with low ranks in the resulting tree tensor network.  The details of
                          the algorithm can be found in Section5.

                       •  It includes a density matrix algorithm to approximate a given tensor network into the target
                          embedding tree.  The algorithm uses a sequence of density matrix algorithms for low-rank
                          approximation to output the embedding tree tensor network, and includes all tensors in the


                  Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     4


Quantum
                                                     (a) Illustration of the partitoned      contract algorithm















                    (b) Illustration of the process to approximate the contraction of two partitions into a binary tree tensor network

                  Figure 4:  (a) Illustration of the partitoned        contract algorithm.  The algorithm takes as inputs a tensor network,
                  a  partitioning  of  that  tensor  network,  and  a  partial  contraction  tree.  The  algorithm  proceeds  by  traversing  the
                  partial contraction tree and approximately contracting a pair of tensor network partitions into a binary tree tensor
                  network.   (b)  Illustration  of  the  process  to  approximate  the  input  tensor  network  (left  diagram)  into  a  binary
                  tree tensor network (right diagram).  The embedding tree is a rooted binary tree that represents the output tree
                  structure.  The tree embedding step maps a partition of the input tensor network to each non-leaf (orange) vertex
                  in the embedding tree.  Finally, the density matrix algorithm (or the canonicalization-base algorithm) approximates
                  the  embedded  tensor  network  into  a  binary  tree  tensor  network.  Each  black  dot  in  the  diagrams  represents  an
                  identity matrix.


                          input  tensor  network  as  the  environment.   When  compared  to  the  canonicalization-based
                          algorithm  that  employs  the  same  environment,  the  density  matrix  algorithm  exhibits  the
                          same or lower asymptotic cost, making it more efficient.  In particular, the density matrix
                          algorithm exhibits the potential to significantly reduce the asymptotic cost when dealing with
                          large environment sizes.  The detail of the algorithm can be found in Section6.
                          The  tensor  network  contraction  framework  proposed  in  [26]  also  offers  the  capability  to
                          handle large environments.  However, the framework in [26] approximates the environments
                          as trees from the outset by cutting certain bonds in the environment, which ignores certain
                          loop  correlations  in  the  environment.   In  contrast,  our  density  matrix  algorithm  directly
                          works  with  the  full  environment  including  loops  and  then  approximates  the  result  of  the
                          contraction as a tree, which for a given environment should be more accurate but potentially
                          more computationally expensive.

                       •  In  scenarios  where  the  mode  ordering  of  the  selected  tree  structure  intended  for  efficient
                          later contractions does not align with the input structure,  our approach employs a hybrid
                          algorithm that integrates the density matrix algorithm and a swap-based algorithm to per-
                          form  the  tree  approximation.   Swap-based  algorithms,  extensively  utilized  in  MPS-based
                          tensor network contraction algorithms such as when applying long-range gates [72] and in
                          other general approximate contraction algorithms like CATN and SweepContractor, use a se-
                          quence of adjacent swaps of MPS modes to permute the ordering of the MPS tensors.  Within
                          our algorithm, a sequence of local swap operations are performed using the density matrix
                          algorithm, each time progressively modifying the structure by a small amount to ensure that



                  Accepted in               2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     5


Quantum
                        the overall cost remains manageable.  The detail of the algorithm can be found in Section7.

                     In Section8, we assess the performance of the proposed algorithm.  Regarding the sub-problem
                 of  approximating  a  general  tensor  network  into  a  tree  tensor  network,  our  experimental  results
                 show  the  superior  efficiency  of  the  density  matrix  algorithm  compared  to  the  canonicalization-
                 based algorithm when applied to multiple input tensor network structures. These empirical findings
                 consistently align with our theoretical analysis.
                     To evaluate the efficacy of our contraction algorithm, we conduct experiments on various ten-
                 sor network structures.  The results demonstrate that by leveraging environments and employing
                 the density matrix algorithm, we achieve significant reductions in overall execution time and im-
                 provements in accuracy when dealing with tensor networks defined on lattices and random regular
                 graphs.  Notably, our algorithm outperforms both the CATN algorithm proposed in [61] and the
                 SweepContractor proposed in [14] when considering tensor networks defined on lattices represent-
                 ing the classical Ising model.  Specifically, our approach achieves an order of magnitude speed-up in
                 execution time while maintaining the same level of accuracy.  This improvement in speed demon-
                 strates the efficiency of our approach.

                 1.2    Organization
                 This paper is organized as follows.  In Sections2and3, we introduce the definitions, the compu-
                 tational cost model, and background for the proposed algorithm.  Section4provides an overview
                 of the proposed approximate tensor network contraction algorithm, with detailed components dis-
                 cussed in Sections5to7.  In Section8, we present the results of a series of experiments to evaluate
                 the performance of the proposed algorithm.

                 2    Definitions and the computational cost model

                 2.1    Tensor network definitions
                 We introduce the tensor network notation here.  The structure of a tensor network can be described
                 by an undirected graph G = (V,E), where each tensor of the tensor network is associated with a
                 vertex in V  and each mode of the tensors is associated with an edge in E.  We refer to edges with
                 a  dangling  end  (one  end  not  adjacent  to  any  vertex)  as  uncontracted  edges,  and  those  without
                 dangling ends as contracted edges.  We usew to denote an edge weight function such that for each
                 edge e∈E, w(e) = log(s) is the natural logarithm of the mode size s associated with an edge e.
                 For an edge set E, we use w(E) = ∑e∈Ew(e) to denote the weighted sum of the edge set.  The
                 weight w(E) is related to the cost of contracting neighboring tensors along the modes associated
                 with the edge set E, which will be discussed in more detail in the next section.

                 2.2    The computational cost model
                 We  summarize  the  computational  cost  model  used  throughout  the  paper.   We  assume  that  all
                 tensors in the tensor network are dense.  The contraction of two general dense tensors A and B,
                 represented as vertices va  and vb  in G = (V,E), can be cast as a matrix multiplication, and the
                 overall asymptotic cost is

                                                 Θ (exp (w(E(va)) +w(E(vb))−w(E(va,vb)))),                                    (1)

                 where E(va),E(vb) denotes the edges adjacent to va, vb,  respectively,  and E(va,vb) denotes the
                 edge connecting va andvb.  Above we assume the classical matrix multiplication algorithm is used
                 rather than fast algorithms such as Strassen’s algorithm [74].
                     To  canonicalize  the  tree  tensor  network,  a  series  of  QR  factorizations  is  employed.   Given  a
                 matrix A∈ Rm×n, performing the QR factorization incurs an asymptotic cost of Θ(mn·min(m,n)).
                 In order to reduce the bond size or rank within the tensor network, we utilize low-rank factorization.


                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     6


Quantum
                 Given a matrix A∈ Rm×n, low-rank factorization aims to find two matrices, B∈ Rm×r and C∈
                 Rr×n, withr being less than the minimum ofm andn, while minimizing the Frobenius norm∥A−
                 BC∥F .  In our cost analysis, we assume the use of the standard low-rank factorization algorithm
                 that  employs  a  rank-revealing  QR  factorization  [28].   The  asymptotic  cost  of  this  algorithm  is
                 O(mnr).

                 3    Background

                 This  section  offers  background  for  the  proposed  approach.   In  Section3.1,  we  provide  a  short
                 survey of several common tensor networks discussed in the paper.  In Section3.2, we review both
                 the canonicalization-based algorithm and the density matrix algorithm for low-rank approximation
                 of tensor networks.  This review serves as motivation for the density matrix algorithm explained
                 in detail in Section6.
                      We cover additional backgrounds in the appendix.  AppendixB.1covers the standard swap-
                 based algorithm used to permute MPS modes, which serves as a motivation for our algorithm that
                 combines the density matrix algorithm and the swap-based algorithm,  as outlined in Section7.
                 Furthermore, in AppendixB.2, we delve into the definition and heuristics of the graph embedding
                 problem, which is utilized in Section5to select an efficient binary tree structure.

                 3.1    A survey of common tensor network structures
                 We survey both tree tensor networks and tensor networks defined on lattices.  The matrix product
                 state (MPS) [78,59], a binary tree tensor network [70], and a general tree tensor network state
                 (TTNS) [55,54,22] are illustrated in Fig.1.  An MPS is a tensor network with a linear structure,
                 with  each  tensor  having  one  uncontracted  mode.   The  binary  tree  tensor  network  has  a  rooted
                 binary tree structure, and all non-root vertices have an order of three.  In a general TTNS, each
                 tensor can have uncontracted modes, and the network has a general tree structure.
                      In  this  work,  we  focus  on  discussing  both  MPS  and  the  binary  tree  tensor  network.   These
                 networks  are  considered  as  special  cases  of  TTNS,  where  each  tensor  has  a  maximum  order  of
                 three.  This characteristic makes them more memory-efficient compared to more general TTNS,
                 especially when considering a fixed rank r.  When the uncontracted mode size s is much smaller
                 than r,  each MPS tensor has a size of O(sr2).  This memory requirement is more efficient than
                 that of the general binary tree tensor network, whose tensor size is O(r3).












                                  (a) MPO                                   (b) PEPS                        (c) 3D lattice tensor network

                 Figure  5:  Illustration  of  the  matrix  product  operator  (MPO),  the  projected  entangled  pair  states  (PEPS),  and
                 the 3× 3× 2 3D lattice tensor network.

                      Fig.5and Fig.3provide visual representations of other tensor networks, including the matrix
                 product operator (MPO), the projected entangled pair states (PEPS) [79,78], and a closed tensor
                 network defined on a 3D lattice.  In the 2D lattice tensor network, each row is either an MPS or an
                 MPO. In the 3D lattice, each slice is either a PEPS or a PEPO. The PEPO has a similar structure
                 to PEPS, but with the distinction that each tensor has two uncontracted edges.





                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     7


Quantum
                 3.2    The canonicalization-based algorithm and the density matrix algorithm
                 Let A∈ Rb×R, B∈ RR×c  denote two tensors in a tensor network, and let E∈ Ra×b  denote the
                 environment tensor network.  The low-rank approximation problem that is widely used in this work
                 can be stated as                               ‖‖‖EAB− E ˆAVT‖‖‖F,    s.t. VTV = I,                                (2)
                                              ˆA∈Rb×r,V∈Rc×rmin

                 where r < R.  For the canonicalization-based algorithm, one first performs a QR decomposition
                 on EA and gets Q∈ Ra×R, R∈ RR×R, and then computes the right r leading singular vectors of
                 RB to obtain V.  For the density matrix algorithm, one first computes the Gram matrix (normal
                 equations) L = (EAB)TEAB, commonly known as the density matrix in the physics literature
                 (and is at the heart of the original formulation of the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG)
                 algorithm [81]), and then computes the right  r leading singular vectors/eigenvectors of L to obtain
                 V.
                     For the case where E is a single matrix, both algorithms yield the same asymptotic cost with
                 the computational cost introduced in Section2.2.  However,  when               E takes the form of a tensor
                 network containing a large number of tensors, the density matrix algorithm is more advantageous in
                 terms of simplicity and efficiency. In particular, the density matrix L = (EAB)TEAB can be easily
                 computed using the existing exact tensor network contraction algorithms, while orthogonalizing EA
                 is usually hard when E does not have a tree structure.  One potential approach for orthogonalizing
                 EA involves directly performing orthogonalization on the matrix resulting from the contraction of
                 EA, but this method is inefficient when E is not path-like.
                     In Section3.2.1, we review the canonicalization-based algorithm to reduce the mode sizes of
                 tree tensor networks.  We will show in Section6.4that the cost of the density matrix algorithm is
                 upper-bounded by the canonicalization-based algorithm.  In Section3.2.2, we provide a review of
                 existing algorithms employed in truncating the MPO-MPS contraction, a common tensor network
                 contraction and a special case of our more general algorithm.

                 3.2.1    The canonicalization-based algorithm for truncating tree tensor networks
                 We review the canonicalization-based algorithm to truncate a tree tensor network [82].  We first
                 introduce the canonical form in Definition1.  For a given matrix                M that is implicitly represented
                 by a  tree tensor  network,  its canonical  form  makes  the  whole tree  orthogonal and uses  another
                 matrix to store the non-orthogonal part.








                      Figure 6:  Illustration of truncating the mode represented by the edge (u,v) through canonicalization.

                 Definition 1 (Canonical form). Consider a tensor network with a tree structureT  = (V,E).  For a
                 given vertexu∈V  and an edge (u,v), letS⊆V  denote the vertices connected tou when the edge
                 (u,v) is removed fromT .  canonical            formT (u,v) means that all tensors represented by vertices in
                 S  are orthogonalized towards the edge (u,v), and a new vertex is added between u and v whose
                 tensor contains the non-orthogonal part.  An illustration of canonical                    formT (u,v) is in Fig.6.
                     The canonicalization-based algorithm is shown in Algorithm1.  It proceeds by computing the
                 truncated network through a post-order depth-first search (DFS) traversal of the tree structure.
                 At each vertex v, the algorithm constructs the canonical form around v while truncating the edge
                 connected  to v.   The  resulting  orthogonal  tensor Uv  is  then  computed.   This  iterative  process
                 continues  until  only  the  root  vertex  remains,  which  contains  the  comprehensive  non-orthogonal
                 information of the entire network.


                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     8


Quantum
                 Algorithm 1 The canonicalization-based algorithm for truncating a tree tensor network
                  1:  Input:  The tree tensor network T  = (V,E), the maximum mode size χ, and the root vertex
                      r
                  2: Tr← a directed tree of T  with a root vertex r
                  3:  for each v∈V\{r} based on a post-order DFS traversal of Tr do
                  4:  u← parent(Tr,v)
                  5:     Change the tree tensor network to canonical                formT (u,v) with the non-orthogonal matrix
                        Ru
                  6:     Mv←  matricization  of  the  tensor  at v  with  the  mode  connecting u,v  combined  into  the
                        column
                  7:     Uv ˆRu← rank-χ approximation of MvRu with Uv being orthogonal
                  8:     Update the tensor at u as  ˆRuMu
                  9:  end for
                 10:  return  the tree tensor network that contains all Uv and the root tensor Mr


                 3.2.2    Existing algorithms for truncating MPO-MPS multiplication
                 We provide a review of a set of algorithms to truncate the output of MPO-MPS multiplication.
                 These  algorithms  are  widely  used  in  the  boundary-based  algorithm  to  approximately  contract
                 2D  lattice  tensor  networks  like  those  surveyed  in  Section3.1.   The  boundary-based  contraction
                 algorithm initiates the process with a boundary MPS of the 2D network (e.g., the leftmost MPS
                 in Fig.3b).  At each step, the adjacent MPO is applied to the MPS and the result is approximated
                 as a low-rank MPS. The boundary-based contraction algorithm serves as the basis for motivating
                 the proposed partial contraction tree abstraction and the generalized density matrix algorithm for
                 contracting arbitrary tensor networks.
                     Previous studies [60,53] have explored various algorithms for MPO-MPS multiplication.  These
                 algorithms include approaches based on canonicalization [72,60], the density matrix algorithm [53,
                 24], and the iterative fitting algorithm [79,72].  In this work, we specifically concentrate on the first
                 two types of algorithms.  This choice is driven by the fact that both are one-pass algorithms and
                 theoretical error bounds can be derived for the resulting output of both algorithms.  The iterative
                 fitting algorithm could have better scaling and lead to better performance in some cases but the
                 use of that approach within our new algorithm is left for future work.

                 Algorithms that use canonicalization    We review two different canonicalization-based algo-
                 rithms:  the zip-up algorithm [72] and the canonicalization algorithm with full environment [60].
                 The zip-up algorithm uses a smaller environment compared to the other algorithm, which consider
                 all tensors in the input MPO and MPS when performing truncations.  Throughout the analysis we
                 use r to denote the MPS rank, use a to denote the MPO rank, and use s to denote the size of all
                 the other modes.  The computational cost comparison between the algorithms is summarized in
                 Table1.

                   Algorithm                              Asymptotic cost                          s≪a = Θ(r)           s = Θ(a)≪r
                   Zip-up                                 Θ(N(s2a2r2 +sar3))                       Θ(N(s2r4))           Θ(N(s2r3))
                   Canonicalization w/ full env           Θ(N(s2a2r2 +sa3r3))                      Θ(N(sr6))            Θ(N(s4r3))
                   Density matrix                         Θ(N(sa2r3 +s2a3r2 +s2ar3))               Θ(N(s2r5))           Θ(N(s3r3))


                 Table  1:  Comparison  of  asymptotic  algorithmic  complexity  between  the  zip-up  algorithm,  the  canonicalization-
                 based algorithm that uses the full environment, and the density matrix algorithm. s = Θ(a) means s is asymp-
                 totically bounded by a both above and below.




                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                     9


Quantum
                 Figure 7:  Illustration of the zip-up algorithm.  Each dashed block includes the tensors to be contracted at a given
                 step.  Each tensor represented by a triangular vertex denotes a tensor with an orthogonality property.


                      The zip-up algorithm [72,60] is illustrated in Fig.7.  We also let the output truncated MPS
                 have rankr.  The algorithm begins by contracting the leftmost pair of tensors.  A truncated singular
                 value decomposition (SVD) is then performed to obtain the left leading singular vectors U1  and
                 the  remaining  non-orthogonal  component V1.   Next,  V1  is  combined  with  the  second  leftmost
                 pair of tensors, and another truncated SVD is performed.  This process continues until it reaches
                 the right boundary of both the MPO and MPS. When the resulting MPS has an order of N, the
                 algorithm’s asymptotic computational cost is Θ(N(s2a2r2 +sar3)).  It should be noted, as depicted
                 in Fig.7, that the truncation at the    ith step employs an environment including alli left MPO and
                 MPS tensors, but not the full environment (all tensors in the MPS and MPO).






                                           Figure 8:  Illustration of the application and truncation algorithm.

                      The canonicalization-based algorithm that uses the full environment is illustrated in Fig.8.  The
                 algorithm first multiplies the MPS and MPO, resulting in an MPS with a rank ofar.  Subsequently,
                 the MPS is truncated via the canonicalization-based algorithm reviewed in Section3.2.1.  When the
                 output MPS has an orderN, the algorithm has an asymptotic cost of Θ(N(s2a2r2 +sa3r3)), which
                 isO(a2) times the cost of the zip-up algorithm.  However, this algorithm offers better accuracy since
                 each truncation utilizes the full environment.  Furthermore, the algorithm maintains a theoretical
                 upper bound on the truncation error [59].

                 The density matrix algorithm    The density matrix algorithm produces an equivalent truncated
                 MPS as the application and truncation algorithm, and we illustrate the algorithm in Fig.9.  The
                 algorithm contains three steps,

                     1.Computing matrices    Li,  as is shown in Fig.9a.  These matrices are computed by sequen-
                        tially contracting the network from left to right, and intermediates Li are saved during the
                        contractions.

                     2.Performing a sweep of contractions from right to left and use    Li to compute all the leading
                        singular vectors Ui  for i∈{1,...,N− 1}.  Specifically, LN  is firstly used to compute the
                        density matrix with the last pair of uncontracted modes left open, and truncated eigende-
                        composition  is  performed  on  the  density  matrix  to  yield  the  leading  singular  vectors  U1.
                        Next, the intermediates LN−1  is utilized to compute the density matrix with the right two
                        uncontracted modes left open.  Additionally, the basis of this density matrix is transformed
                        by applying U1, as shown in Fig.9b.  This process is repeated until     N− 1 tensors Ui  are
                        obtained.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   10


Quantum
                                                                      (a) The first step




























                                                                    (b) The second step






                                                                      (c) The third step

                 Figure 9:  Illustration of the density matrix algorithm.  Each triangular vertex represents a tensor with an orthogonal
                 property.


                    3.Getting the leftmost matrix   MN that encompasses all the non-orthogonal information through
                        the contraction depicted in Fig.9c, and form the output MPS by combining all         Ui and MN.

                     When the output MPS has an orderN, the density matrix algorithm has an asymptotic cost of
                 Θ(N(sa2r3+s2a3r2+s2ar3)). In applications arising in statistical physics and quantum computing,
                 the size s is commonly the smallest.  As is shown in Table1, for the case where    s≪ a = Θ(r),
                 the cost of density matrix algorithm is Θ(s2r5), which is Θ(r/s) better than the canonicalization
                 with full environment algorithm.  For the other case, where s = Θ(a)≪r, the cost of the density
                 matrix algorithm is Θ(s3r3), which is Θ(s) better than the canonicalization with full environment
                 algorithm.

                 Automation and generalization of the MPO-MPS multiplication algorithms    There is
                 an opportunity to generalize the MPO-MPS multiplication algorithms to arbitrary graphs.  In par-
                 ticular, SweepContractor [14] generalizes the MPO-MPS zip-up algorithm, and uses a subroutine
                 that contracts a single tensor with an MPS into a new MPS to contract arbitrary tensor networks.
                 In contrast, our proposed algorithm includes a subroutine that contracts a general tensor network
                 (such  as  an  MPO)  with  a  binary  tree  tensor  network  into  a  binary  tree  network,  allowing  the
                 generalizing of all three MPO-MPS multiplication algorithms.


                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   11


Quantum
                      The  analysis  and  observations  above  suggest  that  the  density  matrix  algorithm  has  greater
                 efficiency compared to the canonicalization-based algorithm.  As a result, we generalize the density
                 matrix algorithm for the MPO-MPS multiplication and implement one that is able to approximate a
                 general tensor network into a tree tensor network.  Generalization of the density matrix algorithm
                 to  trees  presents  two  challenges.   Firstly,  determining  how  to  efficiently  perform  memoization
                 (accelerating the contraction by caching partial contraction results) to reduce costs becomes less
                 straightforward.  In order to address this issue, we have introduced a strategy that utilizes graph
                 partitioning in Section6.  Secondly, selecting an appropriate output tree structure that enhances
                 the  efficiency  of  the  approximation  poses  a  challenge.   For  the  MPO-MPS  multiplication,  it  is
                 evident that the MPS ordering consistent with the input MPS and MPO would yield favorable
                 results.  In Section5, we propose algorithms to select efficient tree structures for general graphs.

                 4    The proposed tensor network contraction algorithm

                 In this section, we present the proposed approximate tensor network contraction algorithm.

                 4.1    Definitions
                 We use G[S] = (S,ES) to denote a sub tensor network defined on S⊆ V , where ES  contains all
                 edges in E adjacent to any v∈S.  For two disjoint subsets of V  denoted as X,Y , we let E(X,Y )
                 denote the set of edges connecting X,Y .  We let E(X) denote the set of uncontracted edges of
                 G[X].
                      For the tensor network represented by G = (V,E), we useV ={V1,...,VN} to denote a graph
                 partitioning that partitions V  into V1,...,VN.  A contraction tree  of the partitioned network is a
                 directed binary tree showing how vertex subsets inV are contracted, and it is denoted T (V).  Each
                 leaf ofT (V) is a vertex subset inV, and each non-leaf vertex inT (V) can be represented by a subset
                 of the vertices, W1∪W2, where its two children are represented by W1 and W2, respectively.
                      For a given vertex in the contraction tree T (V)  that is represented by V′⊂ V ,  path(T (V),V′)
                 denotes  a  sub-contraction  path  of T (V).   This  sub-contraction  path  is  a  subgraph  of T (V)  that
                 contains all vertices in T (V) that are ancestors of V′ as well as the children of these ancestors.  To
                 illustrate, we provide an example of the sub-contraction path of V4 in Fig.10.














                 Figure  10:   Illustration  of  the  sub-contraction  path.   The  left  diagram  denotes  the  graph  partitioning  and  the
                 contraction tree T (V), and the right diagram denotes the sub-contraction path path(T (V),V4).


                 4.2    An overview of the algorithm
                 In this section we present an overview of the algorithm.  The algorithm takes as inputs a tensor
                 network, a partitioning of that tensor network, a partial contraction tree of the partitioned tensor
                 network, an ansatz for the structure of intermediate network contractions (for example, an MPS or
                 a comb tree), and parameters for performing intermediate approximate tensor network contractions
                 which tune the level of accuracy of the method.  The algorithm proceeds by traversing the partial



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   12


Quantum
                 contraction  tree  and  approximately  contracting  pairs  of  tensor  network  partitions  specified  by
                 the  contraction  tree.   The  pair  of  tensor  network  partitions  are  approximately  contracted  using
                 a  specified  algorithm  such  as  the  density  matrix  algorithm,  resulting  in  a  tensor  network  with
                 the specified structure, such as an MPS or comb tree structure.  The algorithm proceeds until all
                 partitions are contracted.  An example of the algorithm is shown in Fig.4.

                 Algorithm 2 partitioned             contract: approximate tensor network contraction based on its given
                 partition
                  1:  Input:  The tensor network T  with graph G = (V,E), its partitionV ={V1,...,VN} and its
                      contraction path T (V), ansatz A, maximum bond size χ, and swap batch size r  //  The  ansatz
                      A can be either “MPS” or “Comb”
                  2:  tn← a mapping that maps each vertex set to its approximated tensor network
                  3: E←{E(Vi,Vj) :i,j∈{1,...,N}} // The set where each element is an edge subset connecting two
                      different partitions
                  4:  // Lines{5-9:  construct edge/edgeset linear orderings that define the embedding tree}
                  5:    σ(E′) :E′∈E        ← selecting an ordering for each edgeset inE  via recursive bisection
                  6:  for each contraction (Us,Ws)∈T (V) do
                  7:  Es← The subset ofE  that is adjacent to the sub tensor network with vertices Us∪Ws((    )      )
                  8:  σ(Es)← embedding            tree    ordering      G[Us∪Ws], path         TV,Us∪Ws          ,Es   // Select an order-
                         ing for edgesets inEs
                  9:  end for
                 10:  for each contraction (Us,Ws)∈T (V) do                  (                                                          )
                 11:      tn(Us∪Ws)← approx            tensor     network     tn(Us)∪ tn(Vs),σ(Es),{σ(E′) :E′∈Es},χ,r,A                    //
                         Approximate the input tensor network tn(Us)∪tn(Vs) as a binary tree tensor network Xs, Algorithm6
                 12:  end for
                 13:  return  the final approximated tensor network, tn(V )

                     Pseudocode providing more details of steps of the algorithm is presented in Algorithm2.  Def-
                 initions  of  all  notations  are  summarized  in  Table2.   The  algorithm  takes  as  input  the  tensor
                 network partitionV  and its contraction path T (V).  During each contraction step along the path,
                 all tensors within the input partitions are treated as the environment.  Consequently, larger parti-
                 tions typically lead to higher approximation accuracy, but at the cost of increased computational
                 complexity.
                     When  two  tensor  network  partitions  are  contracted,  an  embedding  tree  is  first  constructed
                 which specifies the structure of the network that will result from the contraction.  The embedding
                 tree is a full binary tree where each leaf vertex is associated with a dangling edge/mode of the
                 subnetwork  made  from  composing  the  two  partitions  that  are  being  contracted.   Furthermore,
                 each  non-leaf  vertex  in  the  embedding  tree  corresponds  to  a  tensor  within  the  resulting  binary
                 tree tensor network.  All tensors within this network have an order of three, except for the tensor
                 located at the root vertex.  An example of such an embedding tree is illustrated in the second left
                 diagram of Fig.4b.
                     The selection of the embedding tree is guided by an analysis of the structure of the input tensor
                 network graph G, its partitioning, and the contraction path.  This analysis aims to identify a tree
                 structure that optimizes the efficiency of both the current contraction and any subsequent contrac-
                 tions involving the contracted output.  The determination of each embedding tree structure occurs
                 in lines5-9.  Note that the generation of the embedding tree only depends on the tensor network
                 graph structure, rather than the actual tensor data.  The relationship between the embedding tree
                 and the orderings of the edges is further explained in Section4.3.
                     While our method introduces a novel perspective on the construction of the embedding tree,
                 it is worth noting that alternative approaches have been proposed for determining tree structures



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   13


Quantum
                 based on various other heuristics.  For instance, Seitz et al.  [69] propose a method specifically for
                 determining a tree structure based on a quantum circuit.  Other studies, such as those by Nakatani
                 and Chan [55], Murg et al.  [54], Szalay et al.  [75], and Ferrari et al.  [23], explore different heuristics
                 for tree construction, leveraging factors like entanglement or interaction strength.
                      After selecting an embedding tree,  we proceed to embed the tensor network comprising two
                 partitions into the embedding tree and truncate it to ensure that the maximum bond size remains
                 below χ.  This process is performed in lines10-12.  In-depth explanations of the hybrid algorithm,
                 which combines the density matrix algorithm and the swap-based algorithm to obtain the approx-
                 imated binary tree tensor network, can be found in Section6and Section7.  This hybrid algorithm
                 involves multiple iterations of the density matrix algorithm, each progressively modifying the struc-
                 ture of the tensor network to a degree controlled by the swap batch size r.  The choice of r allows
                 the user to find a balance between accuracy and computational cost for specific problem instances.

                 4.3    Determination of the embedding tree
                 We explain the embedding tree structure used in Algorithm2.  As is defined in Section4.2,  an
                 embedding  tree  is  a  rooted  full  binary  tree,  with  each  leaf  vertex  representing  an  uncontracted
                 edge in the tensor network.
                      LetE ={E(Vi,Vj) :i,j∈{1,...,N}}, so that each element inE  is an edge subset connecting
                 two different partitions.  For a specific contraction  (Us,Ws) defined in Table2, we let  Es  be the
                 subset ofE that is adjacent to the tensor network represented byUs∪Ws.  We design the embedding
                 tree structure so that the leaves that represent each Ei∈Es are in close proximity to one another.
                 This arrangement is advantageous because all edges within eachEi are always contracted together
                 in the same contraction.  Placing them close to each other simplifies the contraction process and
                 eliminates the need for unnecessary permutation of modes.
                      Two structures we use for the embedding tree are the MPS (maximally-unbalanced full binary
                 tree)  and  the  comb  [5, 13].   The  comb  tensor  network  is  a  tree  tensor  network  arranged  in  a
                 linear chain with branches.  Both structures are based on a linear orderings σ(Es) forEs and linear
                 orderingsσ(E′) forE′∈Es, and they are generated in lines5-9of Algorithm2.  We formally define
                 the  embedding  tree  with  an  MPS  and  a  comb  structure  in  AppendixC.  We  visualize  both  the
                 embedding tree with an MPS structure and with a comb structure in Fig.11.






                                                                          (a) MPS tree










                             (b) Embedding tree with an MPS structure                 (c) Embedding tree with a comb structure

                 Figure  11:   (a)  Visualization  of  the  MPS  tree  defined  on σS  with σS(xi)  = i.    (b)(c)  Visualization  of  the
                 embedding  tree  with  an  MPS  structure  and  a  comb  structure.   The  input  orderings  are σ(Ei)  =  (E1,E2,E3)
                 with E1  ={e1,e2,e3}, E2  ={e4,e5,e6},  and E3  ={e7,e8,e9}. σ(E1),σ(E2),σ(E3)  are  defined  so  that  in
                 ˆσ =σ(E1)⊕σ(E2)⊕σ(E3), ˆσ(ei) =i.

                      In comparison to the MPS structure, the comb structure has a smaller diameter, representing
                 the maximum distance between any two vertices.  However, the comb structure also has a larger
                 maximum  tensor  size  of  Θ(χ3),  where χ  is  the  maximum  bond  size.   This  is  larger  than  the
                 maximum tensor size of the MPS structure, which is Θ(sχ2), wheres represents the uncontracted



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   14


Quantum
                 mode size and is typically much smaller thanχ.  In Section8, we conduct experimental comparisons
                 between the performance of the MPS structure and the comb structure.
                     Various  heuristics  can  be  used  to  obtain  the  linear  ordering σ(E′)  for  each E′∈E.   In  this
                 work, we utilize the recursive bisection algorithm described in AppendixB.2, on a partition of the
                 input graph G that is connected to E′.  The recursive bisection algorithm is a heuristic that aims
                 to minimize congestion in the linear ordering.  By applying this algorithm, we obtain an ordering
                 that results in the embedding tree tensor network having low ranks.  The algorithm for selecting
                 the ordering σ(Es) is explained in detail in Section5.

                 5    The algorithm to select the edge subset ordering of the embedding tree

                 For  a  given  contraction  (Us,Ws),  we  detail  the  algorithm  to  select  the  linear  ordering σ(Es)  for
                 the intermediate tensor network Gs = (Vs,Es), where Vs = Us∪Ws. σ(Es) is generated based on()
                 both Gs  and the sub-contraction path T  =  path                T (V),Vs     defined at Section4.1, where       T (V)  is
                 the contraction tree over the partitionV.
                     The  ordering σ(Es)  is  chosen  with  two  objectives.   Firstly,  it  is  designed  to  satisfy  a  specific
                 adjacency relation that greatly facilitates efficient subsequent contractions.  This adjacency relation
                 ensures that for each of the subsequent contractions  (Uk,Wk), the contracted edges between Uk
                 and Wk  are adjacent in both input tensor networks  tn(Uk) and  tn(Vk).  The adjacency of these
                 contracted edges results in a lower cost for the contraction, compared to the scenario where the
                 contracted edges are not adjacent.  This adjacency relation is described by the constraint tree forEs,
                 T (Es).  Each leaf vertex in the constraint tree represents an edge set inEs, and each non-leaf vertex
                 has  at  least  2  children  and  indicates  the  edge  subsets  represented  by  the  children  are  adjacent.
                 Each non-leaf vertex also denotes whether the children’s vertices are ordered or not.  We show an
                 example of the constraint tree in the bottom right diagram of Fig.25.  In AppendixD, a detailed
                 explanation is provided on how to select the constraint tree.
                     Secondly, the resulting binary tree structure should be similar to the tensor networkGs in order
                 to keep the ranks of the resulting tree tensor network low.  In Section5.1, we detail the algorithm
                 to find the ordering not only consistent with the constraint tree, but also to minimize the cost of
                 permutation (Kendall-Tau distance between the chosen ordering and another reference ordering
                 whose corresponding line structure is similar to Gs).

                 5.1    Determination of the edge set ordering based on the constraint tree
                 We provide an explanation of the algorithm that determines the ordering for the set of elements
                 Es, denoted as σ(Es).  This ordering is not only constrained by the constraint tree T (Es)  but also
                 aims to reflect the structure of the input graphGs.  The algorithm is presented in Algorithm3.  To
                 begin with, in Line2, we generate a reference ordering denoted as    τ for the set of elementsEs.  This
                 reference ordering is generated using recursive bisection and represents a linear structure that is
                 close to the structure ofGs.  Subsequently, the algorithm proceeds to construct the output ordering
                 by employing a post-order DFS traversal of the constraint treeT (Es). This traversal strategy ensures
                 that the ordering takes into account the constraints imposed by the tree structure.  In AppendixE,
                 we prove that the output ordering of Algorithm3minimizes the Kendall-Tau distance with the
                 reference ordering under the adjacency constraint.

                 6    The density matrix algorithm for tree approximations

                 We  present  a  density  matrix  algorithm  to  approximate  an  arbitrary  tensor  network  into  a  tree
                 tensor  network.   The  standard  approach  involves  embedding  the  input  tensor  network  into  an
                 embedding tree and explicitly forming the untruncated tree tensor network, then truncating the
                 resulting tree tensor network using the canonicalization-based algorithm.  However, this can lead




                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   15


Quantum
                 Algorithm 3 linear           ordering     under    constraint      tree:  Algorithm to get the edge set ordering
                 that minimizes the Kendall-Tau distance with the reference ordering under the adjacency constraint

                  1:  Input:  the edge setEs, the constraint tree T (Es), the tensor network graph Gs = (Vs,Es)
                  2: τ← linear        ordering (Es,Gs) // Ordering generated via recursive bisection
                  3: f← a mapping that maps each vertex in T (Es) to its edge set ordering
                  4:  for each leaf vertex v that represents Ei in T (Es) do
                  5:  f(v)← the ordering that contains the single edge set Ei
                  6:  end for
                  7:  for each non-leaf vertex v that represents  ˆEi based on a post-order DFS traversal of T (Es) do
                  8:  u1,...,unv← children of v
                  9:     if v is labeled as ordered then
                 10:    σ1←f(u1)⊕f(u2)⊕···⊕f(unv) // Concatenate all f(ui) in order
                 11:   S←{σ1, reverse(σ1)}
                 12:     else
                 13:   S← a set of all permutations of{f(u1),f(u2),...,f(unv)}
                 14:     end if
                 15:  τv← a partial ordering of τ  over the subset  ˆEi
                 16:  f(v)← arg minσ∈SdKT (σ,τv)   // Minimize the Kendall-Tau distance defiend at Definition3
                 17:  end for      (       (
                 18:  return f       root    T (Es)))


                 to  tree  tensor  networks  with  large  ranks,  resulting  in  expensive  canonicalization  and  low-rank
                 approximation processes.
                     Our  proposed  density  matrix  algorithm  builds  upon  the  density  matrix  algorithm  originally
                 designed for MPO-MPS multiplication, which is discussed in Section3.2.2.  Given a tree embed-
                 ding  of  the  input  tensor  network,  our  algorithm  eliminates  the  need  to  explicitly  construct  the
                 untruncated tree tensor network.  It offers the advantage of forming a low-rank tree tensor network
                 without requiring the generation of large intermediate tensors.  Specifically, we show in Section6.4
                 that  the  asymptotic  computational  cost  of  the  algorithm  is  upper-bounded  by  the  cost  of  the
                 canonicalization-based algorithm, and we show in Section8that for many input tensor networks,
                 the proposed algorithm substantially reduces the overall execution time.

                 6.1    Definitions
                 Within the algorithm, we use density             matrixT (v) and density          matrixT (v,z) introduced in Def-
                 inition2.  For a given embedding tree      T  = (VT,ET ) with each vertex in T  representing a partition
                 of the tensor network embedded to that vertex, we use the notation density                          matrixT (v) to cal-
                 culate the density matrix of vertex v on top of the embedding tree T , with the open edges of the
                 matrix being the uncontracted edges incident to v.  Moreover,  density                       matrixT (v,z) calculates
                 the  density  matrix  of  vertex v  with  the  open  edge  of  the  matrix  being ET (v,z).   We  show  an
                 illustration in Fig.12.

                 Definition 2  (Density matrix).  Consider a given embedding tree T  = (VT,ET ) with each T (v)
                 for v ∈ VT  representing  a  sub  tensor  network,  and  let T (S)  =∪v∈ST (v).   For  a  given  vertex
                 v∈VT , and a set of edges  ˜Ev⊂ET  that is adjacent tov, letS⊆VT  denote the vertices connected
                 to v  when   ˜Ev  is  removed  from T .   Let  T( ˜Ev)  denote  the  matricization  of  the  tensor  network
                 T (S) with all modes defined by  ˜Ev  are combined into the matrix row.  Then the density matrix()
                 defined on T,v, ˜Ev,  denoted as  density           matrixT      v, ˜Ev  ,  equals T( ˜Ev)TT( ˜Ev).  For simplicity,  we
                 let density     matrixT (v) denote the density matrix of v when  ˜Ev = ET (v,∗) is the uncontracted
                 edge set incident on v,  and we let  density˜Ev =ET (u,v).matrixT (v,u) denote the density matrix of v  when




                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   16


Quantum
                                   (a) density   matrixT (v,z)                                    (b) density   matrixT (z)

                 Figure  12:  Visualization  of density    matrixT (v,z)  and density        matrixT (z).  In  the  left  diagrams  of  (a)(b),
                 the  tree  structure  is  the  embedding  tree T ,  and  each  vertex  represents  a  partition  of  the  network  embedded  in
                 that vertex.  The open edge of the density matrix is marked in red.  The dashed boxes denote the tensor networks
                 squared in the density matrices (T (S) in Definition2).  The right diagrams visualizes the density matrices.  In (a),
                 L1 = density      matrixT (u1,v) andL2 = density           matrixT (u2,v) can be cached and reused when computing
                 the density matrix.


                      For a tensor networkG = (V,E), we also define cutG(X,Y ) =∑e∈E(X,Y )w(e), whereE(X,Y )
                 denotes the set of edges connecting two disjoint vertex subsets X,Y .  For two verticesu,v∈V , we
                 define the minimum cut between u,v in G as

                                                         mincutG(u,v) =    minA,B⊂V      cutG(A,B).
                                                                               u∈A,v∈B

                 LetE1,E2 be the two different subsets of the uncontracted edges of G, we define mincutG(E1,E2)
                 as the mincut between two new verticesa,b on the graph that contains bothG anda,b, wherea,b
                 are adjacent to E1,E2, respectively.

                 6.2    The density matrix algorithm
                 The density matrix algorithm is summarized in Algorithm4.  The algorithm involves computing
                 the  output  network  by  performing  a  post-order  DFS  traversal  of  the  embedding  tree.   During
                 the traversal,  at each vertex v,  the corresponding tensor Uv  is computed.  Subsequently,  vertex
                 v  is  removed  from  the  embedding  tree.   This  process  continues  iteratively  until  only  the  root
                 vertex remains, whose tensor encapsulates all the non-orthogonal information of the network.  A
                 visualization of the algorithm is shown in Fig.13.
                      In Algorithm4, we initially construct an embedding        ϕ utilizing the recursive bisection technique
                 outlined in Algorithm5.  This embedding assigns a tensor network partition to each vertex in the
                 embedding tree and serves as a guide for the memoization strategy. As is reviewed in AppendixB.2,
                 recursive bisection is a standard heuristic to find embeddings with low congestion. It is worth noting
                 that Algorithm5may produce an embedding in which there exists a vertex in the embedding tree
                 whose corresponding tensor network partition is empty.  In such cases, we can address this problem
                 by introducing identity matrices into the input graph.  This adjustment ensures that the resulting
                 tensor network remains equivalent while guaranteeing the non-emptiness of each partition.
                      For computing Uv at each vertexv∈VT , Algorithm4incorporates two subroutines that handle
                 two distinct cases efficiently.  In the algorithm, we let Mv denote the matricized contraction output
                 of the partition atv,T (v), that combines all uncontracted modes into the matrix row.  In addition,
                 let Lv = density        matrixT′(v) and Lu = density              matrixT′(u,v).
                      Since Lv = MvLuMTv , if the number of rows in Lv is smaller than the number of rows in Lu, in
                 Lines10-11we compute                Lv  then obtain its singular vectors, which is the most efficient approach.
                 Conversely, if the number of rows in Lv exceeds the number of rows in Lu, it implies that Lv is not
                 full rank.  In such cases, we use an subroutine called QR-SVD [62] instead in Lines13-18.  we first
                 use QR factorization to orthogonalize Mv and yield QvRv, and subsequently calculate the leading
                 singular vectors of RvLuRTv , which yields an implicit representation of the singular vectors of Lv.



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   17


Quantum
                 QR-SVD avoids the generation of the large density matrix Lv,  thus having a better asymptotic
                 cost.  In Section6.4, we demonstrate that Algorithm4provides a guarantee that its asymptotic
                 computational cost remains upper-bounded by that of the canonicalization-based algorithm.

                 Algorithm 4 density             matrix     alg:  The density matrix algorithm for tree approximation
                   1:  Input:  The tensor networkG = (V,E), its embedding treeT  = (VT,ET ), and maximum bond
                      size χ
                   2: ϕ← tree       embedding(G,T ) // Constructed based on Algorithm5
                   3: r← root vertex in T
                   4: T′← a tree with the same structure as T  and T′(v) for v∈VT  denotes all tensors embedded
                      to v in ϕ
                   5:  for each v∈VT\{r} based on a post-order DFS traversal of T do
                   6:  Av← uncontracted               edges(T′,v)
                   7:  Bv← contracted              edges(T′,v)
                   8:  u← parent(T′,v)
                   9:     if w(Av) =O(w(Bv)) then
                  10:        Lv← density         matrixT′(v) // Defined in Definition2
                  11:        Uv← leading         eigenvectors(Lv,χ)
                  12:     else
                  13:           // Perform QR-SVD [62] to reduce the asymptotic cost
                  14:        Lu← density         matrixT′(u,v)
                  15:        Mv← the matricized contraction output of T (v) with Av combined into row
                  16:        Qv, Rv← QR(Mv)
                  17:          ˆUv← leading      singular      vectors(RvLuRTv,χ)
                  18:        Uv← Qv ˆUv
                  19:     end if
                  20:     Add both T′(v) and a vertex that represents UTv  to T′(u), and remove v from T′
                  21:  end for
                  22:  Mr← contraction output of T (r)
                  23:  return  the tree tensor network that contains all Uv and the root tensor Mr















                 Figure  13:  Visualization  of  the  density  matrix  algorithm.  The  tree  structure  in  each  diagram  is  the  embedding
                 tree.  Each  dashed  circle  represents  a  partition  of  the  tensor  network,  and  each  solid  circle/rectangle  represents
                 a  tensor.   Blue,  purple,  and  orange  vertices  represent  the  input  tensor  network,  intermediate  tensors  generated
                 during the algorithm, and the output tensors, respectively.  The input tensor network is represented by the top left
                 diagram, and the output one is represented by the bottom right diagram.  In each diagram, the network included
                 in the dashed box has a structure of T′  in Algorithm4and is used to compute the density matrix, and red edges
                 denote the open edges of the density matrix.






                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   18


Quantum
                 Algorithm 5 tree         embedding: embedding a graph into the embedding tree via recursive bisection
                  1:  Input:  The source graph G = (V,E), the embedding tree T  = (VT,ET )
                  2:  if|VT| = 1 then
                  3:     return  an embedding that mapping all v∈V  to the vertex in VT
                  4:  end if
                  5: ϕ← an empty embedding function
                  6: r← root vertex in T
                  7: EL,ER← open edges represented by the left leaves and right leaves r, respectively
                  8: SL,SR← bipartition of V  such that cutG(SL,SR) = mincutG(EL,ER)
                  9: ϕL← tree       embedding (G[SL], left         child    tree(T ))
                 10: E′L←E(SL,SR)
                 11: S′L,S′R← bipartition of SR such that cutG(S′L,S′R) = mincutG(E′L,ER)
                 12:  For each v∈S′L, let ϕ(v) =r
                 13: ϕR← tree       embedding (G[S′R], right         child    tree(T ))
                 14:  return  the combination of ϕ,ϕL,ϕR


                 6.3    The density matrix algorithm with memoization
                 As can be seen from Fig.13, there are many shared tensor network parts across density matrices.
                 We  present  a  memoization  strategy  that  generalizes  the  memoization  strategy  for  the  density
                 matrix algorithm of the MPO-MPS multiplication to reduce the computational cost.  The strategy
                 is used in Lines10,14of Algorithm4.
                     The memoization strategy uses the following recursive relation for  density                      matrixT (v) and
                 density    matrixT (v,z),
                                                                                                             
                             density    matrixT (v) = M(v)ET (v,∗)      ⨂       density     matrixT (u,v) M(v)TET (v,∗),
                                                                       u∈N(v)                                                        (3)

                          density     matrixT (v,z) = M(v)ET (v,z)       ⨂           density    matrixT (u,v) M(v)TET (v,z),
                                                                         u∈N(v)\{z}

                 whereN(v) denotes the set of vertices adjacent tov,⊗ denotes a Kronecker product, and M(v)ET (v,∗)
                 denote  a  matricization  of  the  tensor  network  represented  by v, T (v).   In  this  matricization,  all
                 uncontracted modes incident on v are combined into the row.  M(v)ET (v,z) denote a matricization of
                 T (v) where the mode represented by the edge ET (v,z) is the matrix row.
                     To compute the density matrix density              matrixT (v,z), we first compute the density matrices
                 for  its  neighboring  vertices u∈ N(v)\{z},  then  contract  the  target  network  that  contains  the
                 density  matrices  as  well  as  the  tensor  network T (v)  following  (3)   .   The  contraction  cost  of  the
                 above target tensor network is dependent on the selected contraction path, and in practice one can
                 either choose the optimal contraction path that minimizes the contraction cost or select it based on
                 multiple heuristics [27].  Note that one way to contract the target network is to contract   T (v) into
                 a tensor first and then contract it with the density matrices, but it may not yield the optimal cost.
                 If the terms  density      matrixT (u,v) have already been computed when generating other density
                 matrices, we will cache and reuse them here.  We illustrate such strategy in Fig.12a.  The same
                 strategy is used to compute density            matrixT (v).
                     In Algorithm4,  the computation of each density matrix occurs only once.  Considering that
                 the  embedding  tree T  is  limited  to  being  a  rooted  binary  tree,  there  are  at  most  three  density
                 matrices to be calculated for each vertexv in the embedding tree.  Below we bound the asymptotic
                 computational cost of the density matrix algorithm using memoization,  and we show that for a
                 given embedding ϕ, the cost will be upper-bounded by the algorithm that uses canonicalization,


                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   19


Quantum
                 justifying the efficiency of the algorithm.

                 6.4    Computational cost analysis
                 We compare the asymptotic computational costs of the density matrix algorithm and the baseline
                 algorithm that utilizes canonicalization, as discussed in Section3.2.1.  In Theorem6.1, we establish
                 that the density matrix algorithm can be more efficient in approximating a general tensor network
                 as  an  embedding  tree.   The  cost  of  the  density  matrix  algorithm  is  upper-bounded  by  that  of
                 the canonicalization-based algorithm.  This efficiency arises from the fact that the density matrix
                 algorithm does not need to explicitly contract the partition embedded in each tree vertex into a
                 tensor.

                 Theorem 6.1.  Consider a given tensor networkG = (V,E), an embedding treeT  = (VT,ET ), and
                 an embedding ϕ that embeds G into T .  Let σ :VT→{1,...,|VT|} be a post-order DFS traversal of
                 T  that  shows  the  the  tensor  update  ordering.  Assuming  that  changing  a  tree  tensor  network  into
                 its canonical form will not change any bond size of the network, the asymptotic cost of the density
                 matrix  algorithm  (Algorithm4)  is  upper-bounded  by  that  of  the  canonicalization-based  algorithm
                 (Algorithm1)  if  both  algorithms  use  the  same  embedding       ϕ,  the  same  update  ordering σ,  and  the
                 same maximum bond size χ.

                 Proof.  For the contraction of each density matrix at vertex v in the density matrix algorithm, a
                 valid contraction path can be obtained by contracting the partition at v into a tensor first, then
                 contracting it with other density matrices based on (3).  The cost of this contraction path is an
                 upper bound of the contraction cost of this density matrix, assuming the optimal contraction path
                 is selected.
                     Therefore, the overall cost of the density matrix algorithm, assuming the optimal contraction
                 path is used during the contraction of each density matrix, is upper-bounded by the case where each
                 partition embedded into every vertex v∈ VT  is contracted into a tensor Mv  prior to conducting
                 the depth-first search (DFS) traversal.  This transforms the tensor network into an untruncated
                 tree tensor network.  According to LemmaF.3in AppendixF, both the density matrix algorithm
                 and the canonicalization-based algorithm exhibit the same asymptotic cost when truncating a tree
                 tensor network. By examining this particular case, we establish that the upper bound of the density
                 matrix algorithm matches the asymptotic cost described in Algorithm1.  This finishes the proof.


                 7    The  algorithm  to  approximate  an  input  tensor  network  into  an  embedding
                      tree

                     We introduce a hybrid algorithm that combines the density matrix algorithm with the swap-
                 based algorithm to approximate an input tensor network Gs = (Vs,Es) into an embedding tree.
                 This hybrid algorithm offers a compromise between accuracy and computational cost by perform-
                 ing multiple iterations of the density matrix algorithm.  Each iteration incrementally modifies the
                 structure of the tensor network by a small degree,  ensuring that the overall computational cost
                 remains manageable.  While this approach may sacrifice a certain degree of approximation accu-
                 racy,  it  provides  a  balanced  solution  that  achieves  a  reasonable  trade-off  between  accuracy  and
                 computational efficiency compared to the pure density matrix algorithm.
                     We  present  the  algorithm  in  Algorithm6,  and  an  illustration  is  shown  in  Fig.14.   In  this
                 algorithm, we denote the edge set ordering in the embedding tree as σ(Es), and the reference edge
                 set ordering ofGs asτ (Es). We measure the structural difference betweenGs and the embedding tree(
                 using the Kendall-Tau distance in Definition3, defined as        d = dKT                τ (Es),σ(Es)).  The algorithm
                 utilizes a parameterr to control the extent of structural modifications made by each density matrix
                 algorithm iteration.  The number of density matrix algorithms performed is determined by⌈d/r⌉.
                 Users can choose different values ofr depending on the specific problem.  By selecting a larger value


                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   20


Quantum
                 Algorithm 6 approx           tensor     network:  approximate a tensor network into an embedding tree

                  1:  Input:  The tensor network T with graph Gs = (Vs,Es), the edge set ordering σ(Es), the edge
                      orderings{σ(E′) :E′∈Es}, the maximum bond size χ, the swap batch size r, and ansatzA //
                      The ansatz A can be either “MPS” or “Comb”
                  2: τ (Es)← linear(       ordering (Es,Gs) // Ordering generated via recursive bisection
                  3: d←dKT         τ (Es),σ(Es))// Number of adjacent edge set swaps needed to change τ (Es)  to σ(Es)
                  4: n←⌈d/r⌉ // The number of density matrix algorithms to be performed
                  5:  ˆσ1..., ˆσn← n equally-spaced inverval orderings that separate τ (Es) and σ(Es)
                  6: X0← T
                  7:  for i∈{1,...,n} do             (                            )
                  8:  T← embedding             tree    ˆσi,{σ(E′) :E′∈E},A           // construct the embedding tree based on Defini-
                         tion5and Definition6
                  9:    Xi← density         matrix     alg(Xi−1,T,χ) // Algorithm4
                 10:  end for
                 11:  return  the output tensor network Xn















                 Figure 14:  Illustration of Algorithm6with the swap batch size being     r = 2.  The left diagram denotes the input
                 tensor networkGs as well as the set of edge subsetsEs ={E1,E2,E3,E4}.  The second leftmost diagram shows
                 the ordering τ (Es)  that is generated based on analyzing the graph structure of Gs.  Since 4 swaps are needed to
                 change τ (Es)  to σ(Es),  two  density  matrix  algorithms  are  performed,  one  with  the  embedding  tree  generated  by
                 the ordering ˆσ1  and the other with the embedding tree generated by the ordering σ(Es).


                 of r,  the behavior of the algorithm closely resembles that of the pure density matrix algorithm.
                 On the other hand, a smaller value ofr generally leads to improved computational efficiency while
                 sacrificing some approximation accuracy.
                     In summary,  the hybrid approach within the proposed  partitioned                          contract algorithm ef-
                 fectively balances accuracy and computational cost for specific problem instances.

                 8    Experimental results

                 In this section,  we present the results of a series of experiments to evaluate the performance of
                 the proposed approach.  All experiments were executed on an Intel Core i7 2.9 GHz Quad-Core
                 machine.
                     In Section8.1, we introduce our implementations, the tensor networks and models tested in our
                 experiments.  In Section8.2,  we conducted a detailed comparison between the proposed density
                 matrix  algorithm  for  tree  approximation  and  the  canonicalization-based  algorithm.   Across  all
                 experiments,  the  density  matrix  algorithm  consistently  demonstrated  either  lower  or  the  same
                 asymptotic cost.  In particular, we achieved a remarkable 4.9X speedup with the density matrix
                 algorithm compared to the canonicalization-based algorithm when approximating an MPO-MPS
                 multiplication into an MPS.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   21


Quantum
                     In Section8.3, we justify the                  partitionedcontract algorithm presented in Algorithm2.  We
                 justify our embedding tree selection algorithm and explore the impact of the environment size on
                 accuracy and efficiency across multiple problems.  Additionally, we conduct a comprehensive com-
                 parison between the MPS and the comb ansatz.  Furthermore, we evaluate partitioned                             contract,
                 the CATN algorithm [61]      1, SweepContractor [14]      2, and hyperoptimized approximate contraction
                 [26]      3,  in  contracting  tensor  networks  defined  on  lattices  and  random  regular  graphs  as  well  as
                 tensor networks from random quantum circuit simulation.  We demonstrate a 9.2X speed-up while
                 maintaining the same level of accuracy when contracting tensor networks defined on 3D lattices
                 using the Ising model.

                 8.1    Implementations, tested tensor networks, and the evaluation
                 The  proposed  algorithms  in  the  paper  are  being  developed  at  https://github.com/ITensor/
                 ITensorNetworks.jl.  ITensorNetworks.jl is a publicly available Julia [6] package built for ma-
                 nipulating  tensor  networks  of  arbitrary  geometry,  and  is  built  on  top  of  ITensors.jl  [24].   The
                 library also provides an interface to OMEinsumContractionOrders.jl4, which implements multiple
                 heuristics introduced in [27,44] to generate efficient contraction paths for exact tensor network
                 contractions.  For all the results presented in this work, we use the Simulated Annealing biparti-
                 tion + Greedy algorithm (SABipartite) [44] to generate contraction paths for exact tensor network
                 contractions.
                     Our experiments consider three types of tensor networks: those generated from random tensors,
                 the classical Ising model, and random quantum circuits.
                     For those generated from random tensors, each element within the tensors is an i.i.d.  variable
                 uniformly distributed in the range of [α, 1], where α∈ [−1, 0].  These particular tensor networks
                 have been utilized in previous research [26] as benchmarks for evaluating contraction algorithms.
                 For specific structures like random regular graphs and 3D lattices, the approximate contraction of
                 the tensor network becomes more challenging as α approaches the value of−1 [12].
                     For a tensor network defined on a graph G = (V,E) using the ferromagnetic Ising model, the
                 contraction output,  denoted as Z  and referred to as the partition function,  can be expressed as
                 follows,                                                      ∏
                                                         Z =   ∑                     exp(βσiσj).
                                                               σi,σj∈{−1,1}  (i,j)∈E

                 In the tensor network, the tensor T(v) defined at each v∈V  has an elementwise expression of
                                                                 t(v)            ∏    Wi,e,
                                                                  E(v) =∑
                                                                            i  e∈E(v)

                 where                                [√                                                          ]
                                          W  =   1√     √cosh(β) +√sinh(β) √cosh(β)−√sinh(β)
                                                    2     cosh(β)−√sinh(β) √cosh(β) +√sinh(β)
                 andβ is an input parameter to the model.  We show the relation between the relative error of lnZ
                 and the running time of  partitioned              contract and the baselines in Section8.3.  The quantity
                 lnZ is an important measure that is proportional to the free energy of the system.
                     We also explore the simulation of a 2D random quantum circuit, denoted as|ψ⟩, as detailed
                 in [62,10,4].  The initial quantum state    |0,..., 0⟩ is organized into a 6× 6 grid, and we apply six
                 layers of random circuit gates to this initial state.  Each layer contains random one-qubit rotations


                    1We use the CATN implementation at https://github.com/panzhang83/catn.

                    2We use the SweepContractor implementation at https://github.com/chubbc/SweepContractor.jl.

                    3We  use  the  hyperoptimized  approximate  contraction  implementation  at  quimb  [25]  (     https://github.com/
                 jcmgray/quimb).

                    4The library is implemented at https://github.com/TensorBFS/OMEinsumContractionOrders.jl.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   22


Quantum
                  on top of each qubit and a sequence of two-qubit controlled-X gates, and the two-qubit gates are
                  structured in a brick-layer pattern.  The specific configuration of each 2-qubit layer is detailed in
                  Fig.15.   In  Section8.3,  we  approximately  contract  the  tensor  network        ⟨ψ|ψ⟩,  and  measure  the
                  absolute error of the quantity.










                  Figure  15:  The  arrangement  of  the  initial  four  layers  of  quantum  gates.  Each  circle  denotes  a  qubit,  and  each
                  line denotes a two-qubit gate.  The subsequent layers follow the same pattern.

                      To evaluate and compare the efficiencies of various algorithms, we measure both the execution
                  time and the required number of GFlops (giga floating-point operations).  The GFlops calculations
                  encompass tensor contractions, QR factorization, and low-rank approximations, as outlined in the
                  model detailed in Section2.2.  It is worth noting that in our reported results, the execution time
                  excludes the graph analysis part, which involves graph embedding and computing the contraction
                  sequence of given tensor networks.  This part remains independent of the tensor network ranks and
                  is negligible when the ranks are high.

                  8.2    Comparison between the density matrix algorithm and the canonicalization-based algorithm













                        (a) MPS, χ = 100                (b) MPS, χ = 100                 (c) BBT, χ = 50                 (d) BBT, χ = 50

                  Figure  16:  Performance  comparison  between  the  density  matrix  algorithm  and  the  canonicalization-based  algo-
                  rithm in truncating a binary tree tensor network.  In (a)(b), the input networks are MPSs with different ranks.  In
                  (c)(d),  the  inputs  are  balanced  binary  tree  (BBT)  tensor  networks  with  different  ranks.  The  number  of  uncon-
                  tracted modes is fixed to be 30 for all input tensor networks.

                      We conduct an efficiency comparison between the density matrix algorithm and the canonical-
                  ization based algorithm to approximate an input tensor network into a binary tree tensor network.
                  Our  evaluation  covers  scenarios  where  the  input  tensor  network  structure  matches  the  output
                  structure,  as  well  as  cases  where  the  input  network  has  a  general  non-tree  structure.   In  both
                  instances,  the  density  matrix  algorithm  has  equal  or  superior  asymptotic  cost  compared  to  the
                  canonicalization-based algorithm.
                      In Fig.16, we conduct a performance comparison of truncating both MPSs and balanced binary
                  tree tensor networks.  Let R denote the rank of the input MPS and the balanced binary tree, the
                  analytical  asymptotic  cost  for  truncating  an  MPS  is  Θ(R3),  whereas  for  truncating  a  balanced
                  binary tree is Θ(R4).  As depicted in the results,  the scaling behavior of both algorithms aligns
                  with the analytical predictions. Despite the density matrix algorithm incurring a constant overhead
                  in terms of GFlops, we observe that it exhibits slightly faster performance.  This advantage can be
                  attributed to the fact that the majority of the density matrix algorithm’s execution time is spent
                  on tensor contractions, which are practically faster compared to matrix factorizations, even though



                  Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   23


Quantum
                  both operations have a similar computational complexity.  This property makes the density matrix
                  algorithm  more  favorable  on  GPUs  due  to  their  ability  to  efficiently  run  tensor  contractions  in
                  parallel.
















                                                     (a)                                                      (b)

                  Figure  17:  Performance  comparison  between  the  density  matrix  algorithm  and  the  canonicalization-based  algo-
                  rithm  in  approximating  the  MPO-MPS  multiplication  into  a  low-rank  MPS.  The  order  of  the  input  MPS  and
                  MPO is fixed to be 40.  Both the input MPS and MPO have the same rank χ, and the output MPS rank is also
                  upper-bounded byχ.  The manual algorithms are those reviewed in Section3.2.2that use a manually-determined
                  memoization strategy.

                       In Fig.17,  we compare the performance of truncating the multiplication of an MPS and an
                  MPO.  Our  experiments  encompass  both  the  canonicalization-based  algorithm  and  the  density
                  matrix algorithm,  alongside the reference algorithms reviewed in Section3.2.2.  In the reference
                  algorithms, the memoization strategy is determined and implemented manually rather than auto-
                  matically.  For the canonicalization-based algorithm, the asymptotic cost is Θ(R6), whereR repre-
                  sents the input rank of both MPS and MPO. On the contrary, the density matrix algorithm exhibits
                  an asymptotic cost of Θ(R5).  As shown in Fig.17b, the scaling behavior of both algorithms aligns
                  with our analysis.  The density matrix algorithm outperforms the canonicalization-based algorithm
                  and has a remarkable 4.9X execution time speedup when the input rank is 64.  Furthermore, our
                  algorithm,  equipped  with  the  automatically-chosen  memoization  strategy,  performs  similarly  to
                  the reference algorithms, thereby confirming the efficacy of our approach.













                        (a) MPS, χ = 250                 (b) MPS, χ = 250                 (c) Comb, χ = 50                (d) Comb, χ = 50

                  Figure  18:  Performance  comparison  between  the  density  matrix  algorithm  and  the  canonicalization-based  algo-
                  rithm  in  approximating  a  PEPS  with  rank  2  into  a  binary  tree  tensor  network.   The  column  size  of  the  PEPS
                  equals  the  row  size.   In  (a)(b),  the  embedding  tree  structure  is  an  MPS,  and  the  MPS  site  ordering  is  chosen
                  based on the row- or column-wise traversal of the 2D coordinates of the PEPS tensors.  In (c)(d), the embedding
                  tree structure is a comb, and each edge subset in the comb is a row of the PEPS.

                       In  Fig.18,  we  compare  the  performance  of  approximating  PEPS  on  square  grids  into  MPS
                  and comb binary tree structures.  Both structures are defined in Section4.3.  As can be seen, the
                  density matrix algorithm outperforms the canonicalization-based algorithm when the number of
                  rows and columns of the PEPS is large.  The inefficiency of the canonicalization-based algorithm is
                  due to the fact that there exists some partition embedded in one vertex of the MPS/comb whose


                  Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   24


Quantum
                 contraction yields a large-sized tensor.  The density matrix algorithm avoids the explicit formation
                 of such tensors and thus is more efficient.  In later sections we will discuss the relative merits of
                 using MPS or comb tree structures for intermediate networks.

                 8.3    Benchmark of the partitioned                 contract algorithm















                             (a) 2D lattice, rank=16                 (b) 3D lattice, rank=4          (c) Random regular graph, rank=8

                 Figure  19:   Performance  comparison  between  partitioned            contract  and  SweepContractor  under  the  same
                 contraction  path.   The  swap  batch  size  is  set  to  1  for  all  experiments  in  partitioned   contract.   In  (a),  the
                 row  and  the  column  size  of the  2D  lattice  is  8.  In  (b),  each  mode  in  the  3D  lattice  has  a  size  of 5.  In  (c),  the
                 random regular graph has 100 vertices, each with a degree of 3.


                 Impact of the embedding tree on contraction efficiency    In this section we present results
                 that justify our embedding tree selection algorithm in partitioned                       contract.  In Fig.19, we com-
                 pare partitioned         contract with SweepContractor for tensor networks defined on three different
                 structures using tensor networks with random tensor elements that was introduced in Section8.1.
                 For all the experiments, partitioned              contract uses the MPS ansatz, and both algorithms use the
                 same maximally-unbalanced contraction tree where each partition only contains one tensor.  Con-
                 sequently, the only distinction between the two algorithms lies in the usage of different embedding
                 trees for each contraction between an MPS and a tensor.
                      As  can  be  seen,  both  algorithms  have  a  similar  performance  when  contracting  a  2D  grid,
                 while partitioned          contract significantly outperforms SweepContractor for the other two graph
                 structures.  This difference in performance arises from the fact that different embedding trees result
                 in varying numbers of adjacent swaps of MPS modes.  For tensor networks defined on 3D lattice and
                 random regular graphs, our algorithm generates embedding trees that lead to substantially fewer
                 adjacent swaps.  Note that the  partitioned                 contract algorithm achieves higher approximation
                 accuracy on these two graphs, as fewer swaps imply reduced truncations, contributing to improved
                 accuracy in the results.

                 Impact  of  the  environment  size  on  contraction  accuracy  and  efficiency    We  explore
                 the impact of the environment size on the accuracy and efficiency of contracting tensor networks
                 defined  on  2D  and  3D  lattices  as  well  as  random  regular  graphs,  and  the  results  are  shown  in
                 Fig.20, Fig.21, and Fig.22.
                      In both lattices and random regular graphs, we employ the maximally-unbalanced partial con-
                 traction path for the contraction process.  This path initiates from one partition and progressively
                 combines the previously-contracted section with a new partition following a linear sequence of the
                 partitions.  For 3D lattices, each partition represents either a portion of a fiber or an entire fiber
                 of the lattice.  The contraction path is determined through a row- or column-wise traversal of the
                 2D array resulting from partitioning the 3D lattice into fibers.  Regarding random regular graphs,
                 we draw inspiration from [34] to construct the contraction path using a linear ordering of vertices.
                 We  achieve  this  by  first  employing  recursive  bisection  to  generate  the  linear  ordering  of  all  the




                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   25


Quantum
                              (a) 5× 5× 5, β = 0.3                         (b) 6× 6× 6, β = 0.3                         (c) 28× 28, β = 0.44












                       (d) 5× 5× 5, β = 0.3               (e) 5× 5× 5, β = 0.3              (f) 5× 5× 5, β = 0.3              (g) 5× 5× 5, β = 0.3












                       (h) 6× 6× 6, β = 0.3               (i) 6× 6× 6, β = 0.3              (j) 6× 6× 6, β = 0.3              (k) 6× 6× 6, β = 0.3












                        (l) 28× 28, β = 0.44              (m) 28× 28, β = 0.44              (n) 28× 28, β = 0.44              (o) 28× 28, β = 0.44

                   Figure  20:  Performance  comparison  between  partitioned                 contract,  SweepContractor  [14],  CATN  [61],  and
                   hyperoptimized  approximate  contraction  (HAC)  [26]  in  contracting  lattices  based  on  the  Ising  model.    The
                   swap  batch  size  is  fixed  to  be  32  for  all  experiments.   In  the  legends,  “PC”  denotes  partitioned            contract,
                   MPS/Comb  denotes  the  embedding  tree  ansatz,  and  the  values  (1,  3,  5)  denote  the  size  of  each  partition.  In
                   (a)-(f), the number shown on top of each point is the maximum bond size χ.  In CATN, “Dmax” is an additional
                   input parameter of the algorithm that controls the size of the MPS uncontracted modes.  In HAC, r denotes the
                   distance of the spanning trees used in canonicalization.


                   vertices.  Then, we sequentially include a partition consisting of a specified number of tensors into
                   the contraction path, following the order of traversal in the vertex ordering.
                        When contracting tensor networks defiend on lattices, the results presented in Figs.20and21
                   reveal  that  employing  a  larger  parition  size  (3  or  5  for  the  5× 5× 5  3D  grid  and  14  for  the
                   28× 28  2D  grid)  leads  to  both  faster  and  more  accurate  contractions  when  compared  to  the
                   base condition where each partition contains only one tensor.  The improved efficiency arises from
                   using larger partitions, which reduces the number of executions of the density matrix algorithm,



                   Accepted in               2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   26


Quantum
                                      (a)                                       (b)                                        (c)












                                                                (d)                              (e)

                 Figure 21:  Performance comparison between partitioned                contract and SweepContractor [14] in contracting
                 5× 5× 5 random tensor networks defined on 3D lattices with α =−0.4.  The swap batch size is fixed to be 32
                 for all experiments.  In the legends, “PC” denotes partitioned             contract, MPS/Comb denotes the embedding
                 tree  ansatz,  and  the  values  (1,  3,  5)  denote  the  size  of  each  partition.  In  (a)-(c),  the  number  shown  on  top  of
                 each point is the maximum bond size χ.


                 offsetting  any  overhead  from  using  larger  environments.   Regarding  accuracy,  we  can  see  from
                 Figs.20f,20g,20j,20k,20nand20othat under the same maximum contracted bond size, utilizing
                 a  larger  partition  size  generally  yields  lower  relative  errors  for  both  MPS  and  comb  structures.
                 This  observation  validates  the  efficacy  of  the  environment  in  enhancing  accuracy.   See  the  next
                 section for a comparison of the MPS and comb structures.
                      Regarding random regular graphs, the results displayed in Figs.22b,22cand22eto22jindicate
                 that  using  a  partition  size  of  6  results  in  the  best  combination  of  efficiency  and  accuracy.   To
                 summarize, employing a larger partition leads to a larger environment size, generally reducing the
                 contraction error under the same rank.  However, when it comes to efficiency, the optimal partition
                 size depends on the specific problem. Factors such as the number of executions of the density matrix
                 algorithm to be performed and the cost of forming the density matrix under different environment
                 sizes need to be taken into consideration to determine the most suitable partition size.

                 Comparison  between  the  MPS  and  the  comb  structure    In  this  section  we  discuss  the
                 relative merits of using the MPS and comb tree ansatzes.  When contracting lattices, the results
                 in  Figs.20ato20cand21ademonstrate  that  both  MPS  and  comb  structures  exhibit  similar
                 performance when the maximum bond size is small.  However, as the maximum bond size increases,
                 using the comb ansatz becomes slower in comparison to MPS. On the other hand, when contracting
                 random regular graphs, the results in Figs.22aand22dreveal that both structures display similar
                 levels of accuracy and efficiency.  In summary, both MPS and comb binary tree structures perform
                 similarly in terms of accuracy.  However, the efficiency of the comb structure may lag behind MPS,
                 particularly when dealing with a large rank.  This disparity in performance is attributed to the
                 presence of large tensors with size χ3 in the comb ansatz.

                 Comparison among  partitioned                     contract and the baselines    Here we compare our pro-
                 posed  partitioned          contract  algorithm,  along  with  the  CATN  algorithm  [61],  SweepContrac-



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   27


Quantum
                         (a) Ising Model, β = 0.65                 (b) Ising Model, β = 0.65                  (c) Ising Model, β = 0.65















                       (d) Random Model, α =−0.2                 (e) Random Model, α =−0.2                 (f) Random Model, α =−0.2












                        (g) Ising, β = 0.3              (h) Ising, β = 0.3           (i) Random, α =−0.4             (j) Random, α =−0.4

                 Figure 22:  Performance comparison between partitioned                contract and SweepContractor [14] in contracting
                 random regular graphs with degree 3 and 220 vertices.  The swap batch size is fixed to be 32 for all experiments.
                 In the legends, “PC” denotes partitioned           contract, MPS/Comb denotes the embedding tree ansatz, and the
                 number  (1,  3,  6)  denotes  the  size  of  each  partition.  In  (a)-(f),  the  number  shown  on  top  of  each  point  is  the
                 maximum contracted bond size χ.


                 tor [14],  and hyper-optimizated approximate contraction (HAC) [26],  on contracting tensor net-
                 works defined on lattices and random regular graphs.
                      As  demonstrated  in  Figs.20ato20c, 21aand22a,  our  algorithm  consistently  outperforms
                 CATN in terms of efficiency across all levels of relative error.  When compared to SweepContractor,
                 our algorithm shows superior efficiency for 3D lattices and random graphs,  while both methods
                 perform similarly on 2D grids.  This is expected, as SweepContractor is specifically optimized for
                 planar graphs.  Notably, when contracting a 3D lattice tensor network based on the Ising model,
                 partitioned        contract achieves a 9.2X speed-up compared to both CATN and SweepContractor
                 when reaching a relative error of less than 10−9.  Similarly, when contracting a tensor network with
                 a  random  regular  graph  structure  based  on  the  Ising  model,  partitioned                      contract  achieves  a
                 52.4X speed-up compared to SweepContractor when achieving a relative error of less than 10−5.
                      As shown from the results in Figs.20ato20c, HAC is a more efficient baseline compared to
                 CATN and SweepContractor in contracting lattices based on the Ising model.  On both 5× 5× 5
                 and  28× 28  grids,  both  HAC  and  partitioned                  contract  can  reach  pretty  high  accuracy  with
                 similar efficiency.  On the 6×6×6 grid, the results indicate that partitioned                          contract can reach



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   28


Quantum
                                (a) Tensor diagram of|ψ⟩                                   (b) Benchmark results

                 Figure  23:  An  illustration  and  benchmark  results  for  approximately  contracting  a  2D  random  quantum  circuit
                 tensor network with 6 layers of gates.  (a) The tensor diagram visualization of the PEPS|ψ⟩ that is the output
                 of  the  random  quantum  circuit  simulation  with  6  layers  of  gates.   Each  black  edge  denotes  a  mode  with  size
                 2,  and  each  thick  red  edge  denotes  a  mode  with  size  4.   The  dashed  line  denotes  a  graph  cut  with  the  cut
                 mode size being 212.  (b) Performance comparison between partitioned                 contract and SweepContractor [14]
                 in contracting the tensor network that represents⟨ψ|ψ⟩.  The swap batch size is fixed to be 8 for all experiments.
                 In  the  legends,  “PC”  denotes  partitioned       contract,  and  the  number  (5,  10,  25)  denotes  the  size  of  each
                 partition.  The number shown on top of each point is the maximum contracted bond size χ.


                 higher accuracy and is more efficient when the relative error is smaller than  10−10.  This can be
                 attributed to HAC generating high-order intermediate tensors, which slows it down and exceeds
                 memory capacity when tested with a rank of 256.  In contrast,  partitioned                            contract performs
                 better due to its use of the MPS ansatz, making it more memory-efficient and effective at higher
                 ranks.
                      In terms of memory usage, lets denote the size of dimensions in the input graph,χ≥s the max-
                 imum bond dimension, andDmax≥s an additional parameter controlling the size of uncontracted
                 MPS modes in CATN. The largest intermediate tensor generated in  partitioned                                 contract has
                 a size of sχ2 for the MPS ansatz and χ3 for the comb ansatz.  For CATN, the largest tensor size
                 is Dmaxr2.   SweedContractor  and  partitioned                  contract  with  the  MPS  ansatz  share  a  similar
                 memory footprint of sχ2.  For HAC, the largest tensor size can be χd  where d is the maximum
                 order of the intermediate tensors.  To summarize,  partitioned                       contract with the MPS ansatz
                 has memory usage that is better than other algorithms as a function of bond dimension.
                      We  also  benchmark  our  algorithm  against  SweepContractor  [14]  in  contracting  the  random
                 quantum circuit tensor network outlined in Section8.1.  The output state of the circuit can be
                 represented as a PEPS that is visualized in Fig.23a.  When accurately transforming    |ψ⟩ into an
                 MPS, the maximum bond size will be at least 212 = 4096, as inferred from the graph cut in Fig.23a.
                 As  illustrated  in  Fig.23b,  our  method  manages  to  approximate  the  tensor  network  contraction
                 with a bond size of 210 = 1024, achieving an absolute error of 10−2.  In contrast, SweepContractor
                 fails to converge within the same amount of time.  These significant speed improvements clearly
                 demonstrate the efficiency of our approach over the compared algorithms.

                 9    Conclusion

                 In this work we introduced an efficient algorithm called partitioned                      contract to contract tensor
                 networks with arbitrary structures.  The algorithm has the flexibility to incorporate a large por-
                 tion of the environment when performing low-rank approximations,  and includes a cost-efficient
                 density matrix algorithm for approximating a general tensor network into a tree structure whose
                 computational cost is asymptotically upper-bounded by that of the standard algorithm that uses
                 canonicalization.   Experimental  results  indicate  that  the  proposed  technique  outperforms  previ-
                 ously proposed approximate tensor network contraction algorithms for multiple problems in terms



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   29


Quantum
                 of both accuracy and efficiency.
                     We emphasize several potential future directions that need further exploration and investiga-
                 tion.   Firstly,  the  partitioned     contract  algorithm  assumes  that  both  a  partitioning  of  the  input
                 tensor network and a contraction path over these partitions are provided.  There remains an op-
                 portunity to explore efficient methods for finding optimal partitionings and contraction paths for
                 partitioned       contract, which could further improve its performance.  Additionally, there is scope
                 for investigating how the canonicalization-based algorithm for tree approximation can be acceler-
                 ated.  One possibility is to leverage tensor network sketching techniques [48,47,63,1] to speed up
                 randomized SVD [30], which may enhance the efficiency of the tree approximation process.  An-
                 other is to use variational or fitting algorithms for approximately contracting network partitions,
                 which can have better scaling than density matrix and canonicalization-based algorithms at the
                 expense of potentially requiring multiple iterations to converge [79,72].  Finally, integrating the
                 proposed algorithm into automatic differentiation libraries [50,25,43] could be highly beneficial.
                 This integration would enable the algorithm to be used in gradient-based optimization algorithms
                 for tensor networks, thereby expanding its utility in various optimization tasks.

                 Acknowledgments

                 M.F. and M.S. are grateful for ongoing support through the Flatiron Institute, a division of the
                 Simons Foundation.  L.M. acknowledges support through the Flatiron Institute internship program
                 through  which  this  work  was  initiated.   The  work  of  L.M.  and  E.S.  was  also  supported  by  the
                 US National Science  Foundation  (NSF) grant #1942995  and the Department of Energy  (DOE)
                 Advanced Scientific Computing Research program via award DE-SC0023483.

                 References

                  [1]Thomas  D.  Ahle,  Michael  Kapralov,  Jakob  B.  T.  Knudsen,  Rasmus  Pagh,  Ameya  Vel-
                       ingker,  David  P.  Woodruff,  and  Amir  Zandieh.   Oblivious  Sketching  of  High-Degree  Poly-
                       nomial  Kernels,  page  141–160.   Society  for  Industrial  and  Applied  Mathematics,  January
                       2020.  ISBN 9781611975994.DOI: 10.1137/1.9781611975994.9.  URL                                                                        https://doi.org/10.
                       1137/1.9781611975994.9.
                  [2]R.  Alkabetz  and  I.  Arad.    Tensor  networks  contraction  and  the  belief  propagation  algo-
                       rithm.   Physical  Review  Research,  3(2),  April  2021.   ISSN  2643-1564.DOI:  10.1103/phys-
                       revresearch.3.023073.  URL                   https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.023073.
                  [3]Sanjeev Arora, Satish Rao, and Umesh Vazirani.  Expander flows, geometric embeddings and
                       graph  partitioning.   Journal  of  the  ACM,  56(2):1–37,  April  2009.   ISSN  1557-735X.DOI:
                       10.1145/1502793.1502794.  URL                                           https://doi.org/10.1145/1502793.1502794.
                  [4]Frank  Arute,  Kunal  Arya,  Ryan  Babbush,  Dave  Bacon,  Joseph  C  Bardin,  Rami  Barends,
                       Rupak  Biswas,  Sergio  Boixo,  Fernando  GSL  Brandao,  David  A  Buell,  et  al.    Quantum
                       supremacy  using  a  programmable  superconducting  processor.    Nature,  574(7779):505–510,
                       October 2019.  ISSN 1476-4687.DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.  URL                                     https://doi.org/
                       10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.
                  [5]Daniel Bauernfeind, Manuel Zingl, Robert Triebl, Markus Aichhorn, and Hans Gerd Evertz.
                       Fork tensor-product states:  Efficient multiorbital real-time DMFT solver.  Physical Review X,
                       7(3), July 2017.  ISSN 2160-3308.DOI: 10.1103/physrevx.7.031013.  URL                                             https://doi.org/
                       10.1103/PhysRevX.7.031013.
                  [6]Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B. Shah.  Julia:  A fresh approach
                       to numerical computing.  SIAM  Review, 59(1):65–98, January 2017.  ISSN 1095-7200.DOI:
                       10.1137/141000671.  URL                                 https://doi.org/10.1137/141000671.
                  [7]S.L. Bezrukov, J.D. Chavez, L.H. Harper, M. R¨ottger, and U.-P. Schroeder.  The congestion
                       of n-cube layout on a rectangular grid. Discrete Mathematics, 213(1–3):13–19, February 2000.




                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   30


Quantum
                       ISSN  0012-365X.DOI:  10.1016/s0012-365x(99)00162-4.   URL                                                                        https://doi.org/10.1016/
                       S0012-365X(99)00162-4.
                   [8]Jacob  D.  Biamonte,  Jason  Morton,  and  Jacob  Turner.    Tensor  network  contractions  for
                       #SAT.  Journal  of  Statistical  Physics, 160(5):1389–1404, June 2015.  ISSN 1572-9613.DOI:
                       10.1007/s10955-015-1276-z.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.1007/s10955-015-1276-z.
                   [9]Dan  Bienstock.   On  embedding  graphs  in  trees.       Journal  of  Combinatorial  Theory,  Series
                       B,  49(1):103–136,  June  1990.   ISSN  0095-8956.DOI:  10.1016/0095-8956(90)90066-9.   URL
                       https://doi.org/10.1016/0095-8956(90)90066-9.
                 [10]Sergio  Boixo,  Sergei  V.  Isakov,  Vadim  N.  Smelyanskiy,  Ryan  Babbush,  Nan  Ding,  Zhang
                       Jiang, Michael J. Bremner, John M. Martinis, and Hartmut Neven.  Characterizing quantum
                       supremacy in near-term devices.  Nature Physics, 14(6):595–600, April 2018. ISSN 1745-2481.
                       DOI: 10.1038/s41567-018-0124-x.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-018-0124-x.
                 [11]Moses Charikar, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Howard Karloff, and Satish Rao.   ℓ22 spreading
                       metrics for vertex ordering problems.  Algorithmica, 56:577–604, 2010.
                 [12]Jielun Chen, Jiaqing Jiang, Dominik Hangleiter, and Norbert Schuch. Sign problem in tensor
                       network  contraction.   2024.DOI:  10.48550/arXiv.2404.19023.   URL                                                       https://doi.org/10.
                       48550/arXiv.2404.19023.
                 [13]Natalia Chepiga and Steven R. White.  Comb tensor networks.         Physical  Review  B, 99(23),
                       June 2019.  ISSN 2469-9969.DOI: 10.1103/physrevb.99.235426.  URL                                               https://doi.org/10.
                       1103/PhysRevB.99.235426.
                 [14]Christopher  T  Chubb.   General  tensor  network  decoding  of  2D  pauli  codes.   2021.DOI:
                       10.48550/arXiv.2101.04125.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2101.04125.
                 [15]Andrzej Cichocki.  Tensor networks for big data analytics and large-scale optimization prob-
                       lems.   2014.DOI:  10.48550/ARXIV.1407.3124.   URL                                                         https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
                       1407.3124.
                 [16]Carsten  Damm,  Markus  Holzer,  and  Pierre  McKenzie.   The  complexity  of  tensor  calculus.
                       computational  complexity,  11(1):54–89,  2002.DOI:  10.1109/ccc.2000.856737.   URL                                                   https:
                       //doi.org/10.1109/CCC.2000.856737.
                 [17]Nikhil R. Devanur, Subhash A. Khot, Rishi Saket, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi.  Integrality gaps
                       for sparsest cut and minimum linear arrangement problems. In Proceedings of the thirty-eighth
                       annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC06, page 537–546. ACM, May 2006.
                       DOI: 10.1145/1132516.1132594.  URL                                           https://doi.org/10.1145/1132516.1132594.
                 [18]Laxman  Dhulipala,  Igor  Kabiljo,  Brian  Karrer,  Giuseppe  Ottaviano,  Sergey  Pupyrev,  and
                       Alon Shalita. Compressing graphs and indexes with recursive graph bisection. In Proceedings of
                       the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
                       KDD ’16. ACM, August 2016.DOI: 10.1145/2939672.2939862.  URL                                               https://doi.org/10.
                       1145/2939672.2939862.
                 [19]Josep D´ıaz, Jordi Petit, and Maria Serna. A survey of graph layout problems.       ACM Computing
                       Surveys, 34(3):313–356, September 2002. ISSN 1557-7341.DOI: 10.1145/568522.568523. URL
                       https://doi.org/10.1145/568522.568523.
                 [20]Guy Even, Joseph Seffi Naor, Satish Rao, and Baruch Schieber. Divide-and-conquer approxi-
                       mation algorithms via spreading metrics. Journal of the ACM, 47(4):585–616, July 2000. ISSN
                       1557-735X.DOI: 10.1145/347476.347478. URL                                                          https://doi.org/10.1145/347476.347478.
                 [21]Uriel  Feige  and  James  R.  Lee.   An  improved  approximation  ratio  for  the  minimum  linear
                       arrangement  problem.   Information  Processing  Letters,  101(1):26–29,  January  2007.   ISSN
                       0020-0190.DOI:  10.1016/j.ipl.2006.07.009.   URL                                                            https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipl.2006.
                       07.009.
                 [22]Timo Felser, Simone Notarnicola, and Simone Montangero.  Efficient tensor network ansatz
                       for high-dimensional quantum many-body problems.  Physical Review Letters, 126(17), April
                       2021.  ISSN 1079-7114.DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.126.170603.  URL                                                     https://doi.org/10.
                       1103/PhysRevLett.126.170603.





                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   31


Quantum
                 [23]Giovanni Ferrari, Giuseppe Magnifico, and Simone Montangero. Adaptive-weighted tree tensor
                       networks  for  disordered  quantum  many-body  systems.    Physical  Review  B,  105(21),  June
                       2022.   ISSN  2469-9969.DOI:  10.1103/physrevb.105.214201.   URL                                                  https://doi.org/10.
                       1103/PhysRevB.105.214201.
                 [24]Matthew Fishman, Steven White, and Edwin Stoudenmire.  The ITensor software library for
                       tensor network calculations. SciPost Physics Codebases, August 2022.DOI: 10.21468/scipost-
                       physcodeb.4.  URL          https://doi.org/10.21468/SciPostPhysCodeb.4.
                 [25]Johnnie Gray.  quimb:  A Python package for quantum information and many-body calcula-
                       tions.  Journal  of  Open  Source  Software, 3(29):819, September 2018.  ISSN 2475-9066.DOI:
                       10.21105/joss.00819.  URL                                  https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00819.
                 [26]Johnnie Gray and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan.  Hyperoptimized approximate contraction of tensor
                       networks with arbitrary geometry.  Physical Review X, 14(1), January 2024.  ISSN 2160-3308.
                       DOI: 10.1103/physrevx.14.011009.  URL                             https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.14.011009.
                 [27]Johnnie Gray and Stefanos Kourtis.  Hyper-optimized tensor network contraction.        Quantum,
                       5:410, March 2021.  ISSN 2521-327X.DOI: 10.22331/q-2021-03-15-410.  URL                                                                https://doi.
                       org/10.22331/q-2021-03-15-410.
                 [28]Ming Gu and Stanley C. Eisenstat. Efficient algorithms for computing a strong rank-revealing
                       QR factorization.   SIAM  Journal  on  Scientific  Computing,  17(4):848–869,  July 1996.  ISSN
                       1095-7197.DOI: 10.1137/0917055.  URL                                               https://doi.org/10.1137/0917055.
                 [29]Chu  Guo,  Yong  Liu,  Min  Xiong,  Shichuan  Xue,  Xiang  Fu,  Anqi  Huang,  Xiaogang  Qiang,
                       Ping  Xu,  Junhua  Liu,  Shenggen  Zheng,  He-Liang  Huang,  Mingtang  Deng,  Dario  Poletti,
                       Wan-Su  Bao,  and  Junjie  Wu.   General-purpose  quantum  circuit  simulator  with  projected
                       entangled-pair  states  and  the  quantum  supremacy  frontier.    Physical  Review  Letters,  123
                       (19), November 2019.  ISSN 1079-7114.DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.123.190501.  URL                                                     https:
                       //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.190501.
                 [30]N. Halko, P. G. Martinsson, and J. A. Tropp. Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic
                       algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions. SIAM Review, 53(2):217–288,
                       January 2011.  ISSN 1095-7200.DOI: 10.1137/090771806.  URL                                                  https://doi.org/10.1137/
                       090771806.
                 [31]M.D.  Hansen.   Approximation  algorithms  for  geometric  embeddings  in  the  plane  with  ap-
                       plications  to  parallel  processing  problems.    In  30th  Annual  Symposium  on  Foundations
                       of  Computer  Science,  page  604–609.  IEEE,  1989.DOI:  10.1109/sfcs.1989.63542.    URL
                       https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1989.63542.
                 [32]L.  H.  Harper.    Optimal  assignments  of  numbers  to  vertices.          Journal  of  the  Society  for
                       Industrial  and  Applied  Mathematics,  12(1):131–135,  March  1964.   ISSN  2168-3484.DOI:
                       10.1137/0112012.  URL                             https://doi.org/10.1137/0112012.
                 [33]Stephen W. Hruska. On tree congestion of graphs.        Discrete Mathematics, 308(10):1801–1809,
                       May 2008.  ISSN 0012-365X.DOI: 10.1016/j.disc.2007.04.030.  URL                                                               https://doi.org/10.
                       1016/j.disc.2007.04.030.
                 [34]Cameron  Ibrahim,  Danylo  Lykov,  Zichang  He,  Yuri  Alexeev,  and  Ilya  Safro.   Construct-
                       ing optimal contraction trees for tensor network quantum circuit simulation.  In  2022  IEEE
                       High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), page 1–8. IEEE, September 2022.
                       DOI: 10.1109/hpec55821.2022.9926353.  URL                                     https://doi.org/10.1109/HPEC55821.2022.
                       9926353.
                 [35]Adam Jermyn.  Automatic contraction of unstructured tensor networks.         SciPost  Physics, 8
                       (1), January 2020.  ISSN 2542-4653.DOI: 10.21468/scipostphys.8.1.005.  URL                                   https://doi.
                       org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.8.1.005.
                 [36]George Karypis. METIS: Unstructured graph partitioning and sparse matrix ordering system.
                       Technical report, 1997.
                 [37]Tamara  G.  Kolda  and  Brett  W.  Bader.   Tensor  decompositions  and  applications.          SIAM
                       Review, 51(3):455–500, August 2009. ISSN 1095-7200.DOI: 10.1137/07070111x. URL                                                  https:
                       //doi.org/10.1137/07070111X.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   32


Quantum
                 [38]Stefanos Kourtis, Claudio Chamon, Eduardo Mucciolo, and Andrei Ruckenstein.  Fast count-
                       ing  with  tensor  networks.   SciPost  Physics,  7(5),  November  2019.   ISSN  2542-4653.DOI:
                       10.21468/scipostphys.7.5.060.  URL                  https://doi.org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.7.5.060.
                 [39]T. Leighton and S. Rao.  An approximate max-flow min-cut theorem for uniform multicom-
                       modity flow problems with applications to approximation algorithms. In 29th Annual Sympo-
                       sium on Foundations of Computer Science. IEEE, 1988.DOI: 10.1109/sfcs.1988.21958.  URL
                       https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1988.21958.
                 [40]Michael Levin and Cody P. Nave. Tensor renormalization group approach to two-dimensional
                       classical  lattice  models.    Physical  Review  Letters,  99(12),  September  2007.    ISSN  1079-
                       7114.DOI: 10.1103/physrevlett.99.120601.  URL                                          https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
                       99.120601.
                 [41]Chao  Li,  Junhua  Zeng,  Zerui  Tao,  and  Qibin  Zhao.  Permutation  search  of  tensor  network
                       structures via local sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 13106–
                       13124. PMLR, 2022.
                 [42]Jingling Li, Yanchao Sun, Jiahao Su, Taiji Suzuki, and Furong Huang.  Understanding gen-
                       eralization  in  deep  learning  via  tensor  methods.   In  International  Conference  on  Artificial
                       Intelligence and Statistics, pages 504–515. PMLR, 2020.
                 [43]Hai-Jun  Liao,  Jin-Guo  Liu,  Lei  Wang,  and  Tao  Xiang.   Differentiable  programming  tensor
                       networks.   Physical  Review  X, 9(3),  September 2019.  ISSN 2160-3308.DOI: 10.1103/phys-
                       revx.9.031041.  URL                        https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.9.031041.
                 [44]Jin-Guo Liu, Xun Gao, Madelyn Cain, Mikhail D. Lukin, and Sheng-Tao Wang.  Computing
                       solution space properties of combinatorial optimization problems via generic tensor networks.
                       SIAM  Journal  on  Scientific  Computing,  45(3):A1239–A1270,  June  2023.   ISSN  1095-7197.
                       DOI: 10.1137/22m1501787.  URL                                    https://doi.org/10.1137/22M1501787.
                 [45]Michael  Lubasch,  J.  Ignacio  Cirac,  and  Mari-Carmen  Ba˜nuls.   Algorithms  for  finite  pro-
                       jected entangled pair states.  Physical Review B, 90(6), August 2014.  ISSN 1550-235X.DOI:
                       10.1103/physrevb.90.064425.  URL                              https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.064425.
                 [46]Michael Lubasch,  J Ignacio Cirac,  and Mari-Carmen Ba˜nuls.  Unifying projected entangled
                       pair state contractions.  New Journal of Physics, 16(3):033014, March 2014.  ISSN 1367-2630.
                       DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/16/3/033014.  URL                                                       https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/16/3/
                       033014.
                 [47]Linjian  Ma  and  Edgar  Solomonik.   Fast  and  accurate  randomized  algorithms  for  low-rank
                       tensor decompositions.  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24299–24312,
                       2021.
                 [48]Linjian  Ma  and  Edgar  Solomonik.   Cost-efficient  gaussian  tensor  network  embeddings  for
                       tensor-structured inputs.  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35,
                       pages 38980–38993, 2022.
                 [49]Linjian  Ma  and  Chao  Yang.    Low  rank  approximation  in  simulations  of  quantum  algo-
                       rithms.   Journal  of  Computational  Science,  59:101561,  March 2022.  ISSN 1877-7503.DOI:
                       10.1016/j.jocs.2022.101561.  URL                          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2022.101561.
                 [50]Linjian Ma,  Jiayu Ye,  and Edgar Solomonik.  AutoHOOT: Automatic high-order optimiza-
                       tion for tensors.  In  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  International  Conference  on  Parallel  Architec-
                       tures  and  Compilation  Techniques,  PACT ’20,  page 125–137. ACM, September 2020.DOI:
                       10.1145/3410463.3414647.  URL                                           https://doi.org/10.1145/3410463.3414647.
                 [51]Paul Manuel, Indra Rajasingh, Bharati Rajan, and Helda Mercy.  Exact wirelength of hyper-
                       cubes on a grid.   Discrete  Applied  Mathematics,  157(7):1486–1495,  April 2009.  ISSN 0166-
                       218X.DOI: 10.1016/j.dam.2008.09.013.  URL                                                       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2008.09.
                       013.
                 [52]Akira Matsubayashi. Separator-based graph embedding into multidimensional grids with small
                       edge-congestion.   Discrete  Applied  Mathematics, 185:119–137, April 2015.  ISSN 0166-218X.
                       DOI: 10.1016/j.dam.2014.11.024.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2014.11.024.
                 [53]Tensornetwork.org contributors.  Density matrix algorithm.        tensornetwork.org, 2021.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   33


Quantum
                 [54]V. Murg, F. Verstraete, R. Schneider, P. R. Nagy, and       ¨O. Legeza.  Tree tensor network state
                       with variable tensor order: An efficient multireference method for strongly correlated systems.
                       Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 11(3):1027–1036, February 2015.  ISSN 1549-
                       9626.DOI: 10.1021/ct501187j.  URL                                        https://doi.org/10.1021/ct501187j.
                 [55]Naoki  Nakatani  and  Garnet  Kin-Lic  Chan.    Efficient  tree  tensor  network  states  (TTNS)
                       for  quantum  chemistry:   Generalizations  of  the  density  matrix  renormalization  group  al-
                       gorithm.   The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics,  138(13),  April  2013.   ISSN  1089-7690.DOI:
                       10.1063/1.4798639.  URL                                https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4798639.
                 [56]Bryan   O’Gorman.      Parameterization   of   tensor   network   contraction.      2019.DOI:
                       10.48550/arXiv.1906.00013.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.00013.
                 [57]Rom´an  Or´us.   Tensor  networks  for  complex  quantum  systems.         Nature  Reviews  Physics,  1
                       (9):538–550, August 2019.  ISSN 2522-5820.DOI: 10.1038/s42254-019-0086-7.  URL                                                https:
                       //doi.org/10.1038/s42254-019-0086-7.
                 [58]Rom´an Or´us.  A practical introduction to tensor networks:  Matrix product states and pro-
                       jected entangled pair states.  Annals of Physics, 349:117–158, October 2014.  ISSN 0003-4916.
                       DOI: 10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013.  URL                                            https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013.
                 [59]I. V. Oseledets.  Tensor-train decomposition.        SIAM  Journal  on  Scientific  Computing, 33(5):
                       2295–2317,  January 2011.  ISSN 1095-7197.DOI: 10.1137/090752286.  URL                                                   https://doi.
                       org/10.1137/090752286.
                 [60]Sebastian  Paeckel,   Thomas  K¨ohler,   Andreas  Swoboda,   Salvatore  R.  Manmana,   Ulrich
                       Schollw¨ock, and Claudius Hubig.  Time-evolution methods for matrix-product states.  Annals
                       of  Physics,  411:167998,  December 2019.  ISSN 0003-4916.DOI: 10.1016/j.aop.2019.167998.
                       URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2019.167998.
                 [61]Feng Pan,  Pengfei Zhou,  Sujie Li,  and Pan Zhang.  Contracting arbitrary tensor networks:
                       General approximate algorithm and applications in graphical models and quantum circuit sim-
                       ulations.  Physical Review Letters, 125(6), August 2020. ISSN 1079-7114.DOI: 10.1103/phys-
                       revlett.125.060503.  URL                                https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.060503.
                 [62]Yuchen Pang, Tianyi Hao, Annika Dugad, Yiqing Zhou, and Edgar Solomonik.  Efficient 2D
                       tensor network simulation of quantum systems.  In SC20:  International Conference for High
                       Performance  Computing,  Networking,  Storage  and  Analysis, pages 1–14. IEEE, 2020.DOI:
                       10.5555/3433701.3433719.  URL                                           https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3433701.3433719.
                 [63]Beheshteh Rakhshan and Guillaume Rabusseau.  Tensorized random projections.  In        Interna-
                       tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3306–3316. PMLR, 2020.
                 [64]Satish Rao and Andr´ea W. Richa.  New approximation techniques for some linear ordering
                       problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 34(2):388–404, January 2005. ISSN 1095-7111.DOI:
                       10.1137/s0097539702413197.  URL                                                https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539702413197.
                 [65]J A Reyes and E M Stoudenmire. Multi-scale tensor network architecture for machine learning.
                       Machine  Learning:  Science  and  Technology, 2(3):035036, July 2021.  ISSN 2632-2153.DOI:
                       10.1088/2632-2153/abffe8.  URL                                            https://doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/abffe8.
                 [66]Subhayan  Sahu  and  Brian  Swingle.   Efficient  tensor  network  simulation  of  quantum  many-
                       body physics on sparse graphs.  2022.DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.04701.  URL                                                       https://doi.
                       org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.04701.
                 [67]Sebastian Schlag,  Tobias Heuer,  Lars Gottesb¨uren,  Yaroslav Akhremtsev,  Christian Schulz,
                       and  Peter  Sanders.   High-quality  hypergraph  partitioning.   ACM  Journal  of  Experimental
                       Algorithmics, 27:1–39, December 2022. ISSN 1084-6654.DOI: 10.1145/3529090. URL                                               https:
                       //doi.org/10.1145/3529090.
                 [68]U. Schollw¨ock.  The density-matrix renormalization group.         Reviews  of  Modern  Physics,  77
                       (1):259–315,  April 2005.  ISSN 1539-0756.DOI: 10.1103/revmodphys.77.259.  URL                                  https:
                       //doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.77.259.
                 [69]Philipp  Seitz,  Ismael  Medina,  Esther  Cruz,  Qunsheng  Huang,  and  Christian  B.  Mendl.
                       Simulating  quantum  circuits  using  tree  tensor  networks.    Quantum,  7:964,  March  2023.





                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   34


Quantum
                       ISSN  2521-327X.DOI:  10.22331/q-2023-03-30-964.    URL                                                                 https://doi.org/10.22331/
                       q-2023-03-30-964.
                 [70]Y.-Y. Shi, L.-M. Duan, and G. Vidal.  Classical simulation of quantum many-body systems
                       with a tree tensor network.  Physical  Review  A, 74(2), August 2006.  ISSN 1094-1622.DOI:
                       10.1103/physreva.74.022320.  URL                     https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.74.022320.
                 [71]Horst  D.  Simon  and  Shang-Hua  Teng.    How  good  is  recursive  bisection?            SIAM  Jour-
                       nal  on  Scientific  Computing,  18(5):1436–1445,  September  1997.    ISSN  1095-7197.DOI:
                       10.1137/s1064827593255135.  URL                                                https://doi.org/10.1137/S1064827593255135.
                 [72]E M Stoudenmire and Steven R White. Minimally entangled typical thermal state algorithms.
                       New Journal of Physics, 12(5):055026, may 2010.DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/12/5/055026. URL
                       https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/12/5/055026.
                 [73]Edwin Stoudenmire and David J Schwab. Supervised learning with tensor networks.        Advances
                       in  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems,  29,  2016.DOI: 10.5555/3157382.3157634.  URL
                       https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3157382.3157634.
                 [74]Volker Strassen. Gaussian elimination is not optimal.       Numerische Mathematik, 13(4):354–356,
                       August 1969.  ISSN 0945-3245.DOI: 10.1007/bf02165411.  URL                                                    https://doi.org/10.1007/
                       BF02165411.
                 [75]Szil´ard  Szalay,  Max  Pfeffer,  Valentin  Murg,  Gergely  Barcza,  Frank  Verstraete,  Reinhold
                       Schneider, and Ors Legeza.  Tensor product methods and entanglement optimization for ab
                       initio quantum chemistry.  International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, 115(19):1342–1391,
                       2015.DOI: 10.1002/qua.24898.  URL                    https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.24898.
                 [76]Dimitrios M. Thilikos, Maria Serna, and Hans L. Bodlaender. Cutwidth I: A linear time fixed
                       parameter algorithm.  Journal  of  Algorithms, 56(1):1–24, July 2005.  ISSN 0196-6774.DOI:
                       10.1016/j.jalgor.2004.12.001.  URL                                                https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalgor.2004.12.001.
                 [77]Vijay V Vazirani.        Approximation algorithms, volume 1.  Springer, 2001.
                 [78]F.  Verstraete,  V.  Murg,  and  J.I.  Cirac.   Matrix  product  states,  projected  entangled  pair
                       states, and variational renormalization group methods for quantum spin systems.  Advances
                       in  Physics, 57(2):143–224, March 2008.  ISSN 1460-6976.DOI: 10.1080/14789940801912366.
                       URL https://doi.org/10.1080/14789940801912366.
                 [79]Frank Verstraete and J Ignacio Cirac.  Renormalization algorithms for quantum-many body
                       systems in two and higher dimensions.  2004.DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.COND-MAT/0407066.
                       URL https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.COND-MAT/0407066.
                 [80]Guifr´e  Vidal.    Efficient  classical  simulation  of  slightly  entangled  quantum  computations.
                       Physical  Review  Letters,  91(14),  October  2003.    ISSN  1079-7114.DOI:  10.1103/phys-
                       revlett.91.147902.  URL                              https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.147902.
                 [81]Steven R. White.  Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups.        Physical
                       Review  Letters,  69(19):2863–2866,  November  1992.   ISSN  0031-9007.DOI:  10.1103/phys-
                       revlett.69.2863.  URL                          https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.2863.
                 [82]Yifan Zhang and Edgar Solomonik. On stability of tensor networks and canonical forms. 2020.
                       DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2001.01191.  URL                                              https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2001.01191.
                 [83]Yiqing  Zhou,  E.  Miles  Stoudenmire,  and  Xavier  Waintal.   What  limits  the  simulation  of
                       quantum  computers?    Physical  Review  X,  10(4),  November  2020.   ISSN  2160-3308.DOI:
                       10.1103/physrevx.10.041038.  URL                             https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.10.041038.


                 A    Notations

                 B    Additional background

                 B.1    The swap-based algorithm to reorder MPS modes
                 In the MPS-based automated tensor network contraction algorithms including CATN and Sweep-
                 Contractor,  an  important  step  is  to  reorder  the  sites  in  an  MPS.  The  reordering  changes  the


                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   35


Quantum
                  Notations                                     Meanings

                  G = (V,E)                                     The input tensor network graph

                  V ={V1,...,VN}                                A partitioning of G

                  T (V)                                         A contraction tree overV

                  G[U]                                          A subgraph of G that only contains vertices U

                  E ={E(Vi,Vj) :i,j∈{1,...,N}}                  The set where each element inE is an edge subset connecting
                                                                two different partitions

                  (Us,Ws)                                       The contraction s where the first tensor is the contraction
                                                                output of verticesUs and the second tensor is the contraction
                                                                output of vertices Ws

                  Es ={E′∩E(Us∪Ws) :E′∈E}                       The subset ofE  that is adjacent to the tensor network rep-
                                                                resented by Us∪Ws

                  σ(Es)                                         A linear ordering of the elements inEs
                              (          )
                  T  = path     T (V),Vs                        The sub-contraction path over Vs

                  T (Es)                                        Constraint tree detailed in AppendixD


                                                     Table 2:  Notation used throughout the paper.


                 adjacency relation in the MPS, and is used so that subsequent contractions can be performed with
                 lower cost.  The reordering is commonly performed via a sequence of adjacent site swappings.  For
                 a given MPS whose sites are denoted as a set S  and its input ordering is denoted as an injective
                 mapping σ  : S→{1,...,|S|},  changing  it  to  a  different  ordering τ  requires  at  least dKT (σ,τ)
                 number of swaps, where dKT denotes the Kendall-Tau distance defined in Definition3.

                 Definition 3.  Let σ,τ  be two orderings over S.  The Kendall Tau distance between σ,τ  is the
                 number of pairs that are ordered differently in σ,τ, and is also the number of pairwise adjacent
                 transpositions needed to transform σ into τ  (or vise versa),
                                                                               ⏐⏐⏐σ(c,c′)−τ(c,c′)⏐⏐⏐,                                           (4)
                                                       dKT (σ,τ) = ∑
                                                                       (c,c′)∈S
                                        (                )
                 where σ(c,c′) :=          1σ(c)<σ(c′)     indicates if c is ahead of c′ in σ.

                     We illustrate the standard algorithm to swap adjacent MPS sites via a contraction and a low-
                 rank  approximation in  Fig.24.  The  algorithm  first contracts two  sites into a  single  tensor  and
                 subsequently  performs  a  low-rank  approximation  to  split  the  tensor  into  two  parts.   When  the
                 uncontracted modes have sizes x and y, and the MPS ranks are a,c, and b, the contraction step
                 has an asymptotic cost of Θ(abcxy), resulting in a tensor with a size ofabxy.  Without truncation,
                 the output rank of the low-rank approximation operation would be the minimum amongay,bx,cxy.
                 In practice, it is common to set an upper boundγ for the MPS ranks, which limits the asymptotic
                 cost of the approximation operation to O(abxy min(ay,bx,cxy,γ)) when using the cost model in
                 Section2.2.  To reduce the truncation error, canonicalization is commonly performed on the MPS
                 to orthogonalize all other sites.





                 Accepted in            2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   36


Quantum
                                Figure 24:  Illustration of the swap operation and the asymptotic computational cost.

                 B.2    Background on embedding an source graph into a target graph
                 Our proposed algorithm uses heuristics from the graph embedding problem.  A graph embedding
                 of a source graph Gs  = (Vs,Es) into a target graph Gt  = (Vt,Et) is a map from vertices of the
                 input graph onto vertices of the output graph, ϕ : Vs→ Vt, and each edge connecting u,v of Gs
                 is mapped onto a path connecting ϕ(u),ϕ(v) of Gt.  For each edge e∈ Et, we let congestion(e)
                 denote the number of times e is used as a corresponding path of some edge in Gs.  We look at
                 the problem of finding the graph embedding that minimizes the congestion [33,9,52,7,51].  This
                 metric is used since when embedding a tensor network into another graph, low congestion implies
                 that the embedded tensor network has low ranks as well as low memory usage.
                     For the case where Gt is a line graph and ϕ is an injective mapping, finding ϕ that minimizes
                 the congestion is the widely-discussed linear ordering problem.  When the objective is to minimize
                 maxe∈Et congestion(e), the problem has been called the minimum cut linear arrangement problem,
                 and  the  congestion  is  also  called  cutwidth  in  the  previous  work  [76].   When  the  objective  is  to
                 minimize ∑e∈Et congestion(e),  the  problem  has  been  called  the  minimum  linear  arrangement
                 problem  [32, 19],  and  multiple  approximation  algorithms  with  bounded  complexity  have  been
                 proposed [20,64,21,11,17].
                     Recursive  bisection  is  a  simple  yet  effective  divide-and-conquer  heuristic  widely  adopted  in
                 both  linear  ordering  problems  [18, 31]  and  balanced  graph  partitioning  [67, 71].   For  the  linear
                 ordering problem, the algorithm proceeds via first applying an approximate  1/3-balanced cut to
                 separate Vs  into two parts S  and Vs\S, then placing all vertices of S  before all vertices not in
                 S, and then recursing on both S  and Vt\S.  Let n denote the number of vertices in the graph,
                 it  is  known  that  if  one  has  a γ-approximation  algorithm  for  minimum  1/3-balanced  cut,  then
                 both the minimum cut linear arrangement and the minimum linear arrangement problem admit
                 an  approximation  of O(γ logn)  [31, 77].   The  approximation  factor  for  the           1/3-balanced  cut  is
                 improved from γ  = O(logn) [39] to   γ  = O(√logn) [3],  making the approximation factor of the
                 recursive bisection O(log1.5n).
                     In  Sections5and6,  we  use  recursive  bisection  as  a  heuristic  for  other  embedding  problems
                 where ϕ is not necessarily injective, and Gt is a general binary tree rather than a line graph.

                 C    Embedding tree definitions

                 We formally define the embedding tree with an MPS and a comb structure in Definition5and
                 Definition6.  Both definitions are based on the MPS tree, which is defined in Definition4.

                 Definition  4  (MPS  tree).  Consider  a  set S  with  a  linear  ordering σS.   Let xi∈ S  denote  the
                 element  with σS(xi)  = i.   The  MPS  tree  defined  on σS  is  a  full  binary  tree  with  the  elements
                 of S  serving as the tree’s leaf nodes.  The MPS tree contains|S|− 1 non-leaf nodes,  where the
                 first non-leaf node is connected to x1 and x2, and the ith non-leaf node for i∈{2,...,|S|− 1} is
                 connected to the i− 1th non-leaf node and xi+1.  An example is shown in Fig.11a.

                 Definition 5  (Embedding tree with an MPS structure).  Consider orderings σ(Es)  and σ(E′)  for
                 E′∈Es.  Letns =|Es|, and letEi denote the edgeset withσ(Es)(Ei) =i.  The MPS embedding tree
                 based onσ(Es),{σ(E′),E′∈Es} is the MPS tree defined on the orderingσ(E1)⊕···⊕σ(Ens), where
                 we useσS1⊕σS2 to denote the concatenation of two orderings σS1 andσS2, so that eachx∈S1 is
                 mapped to σS1(x) and each x∈S2 is mapped to σS2(x) +|S1|.



                 Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   37


Quantum
                 Definition  6  (Embedding  tree  with  a  comb  structure).  Consider  orderings σ(Es)  and σ(E′)  for
                 E′∈Es.  Let ns =|Es|, and let Ei denote the edgeset with σ(Es)(Ei) =i.  Let Ti denote the MPS
                 tree on top ofσ(Ei) and letri denote the root node ofTi.  The comb embedding tree based onσ(Es),
                 {σ(E′),E′∈Es} contains all Ti for i∈{1,...,ns} and another MPS tree  ˆT  used to connect all Ti.
                 The MPS tree  ˆT connects allri and is defined on top of the ordering ˆσ :{r1,...,rns}→{1,...,ns},
                 where ˆσ(ri) =i.

                 D    Determination of the constraint tree based on the contraction path

                 The constraint tree T (Es)  is constructed based on the sub-contraction path T .  The tree is con-
                 structed bottom-up by connecting subsets of edges involved in the contraction path.  This construc-
                 tion is based on the assumption that ordering edges to make earlier rather than later contractions
                 efficient is more important.
                      Specifically, we letU1,...,Un be then partitions contracted withVs in order in the pathT , let
                 E be the edge partitions defined in Line3of Algorithm2, and let        E(Ui) ={ ¯E∩E(Ui) :  ¯E∈E} be
                 the subset ofE  incident on Ui.  For each contraction with Ui, we use  ˆEi to denote the subset ofEs
                 that we want to be connected in T (Es) based on the contraction.  In particular,  ˆE1 = (Es∩E(U1))
                 contains all contracted edges E(Vs,U1).  For each i∈{2,...,n}, we want (Es∩E(Ui)) along with
                 some  ˆEj,j <i to be adjacent.  Formally speaking, for each i∈{1,...,n}, we define

                                                                  ˆEi = (Es∩E(Ui)) ⋃          ˆEj,                                                     (5)
                                                                                        j∈Si

                 where Si⊆{1,...,i− 1} is a subset of indices ahead of i such that for each j∈Si, Uj is adjacent
                 to Ui.  In Fig.25, we use an example to illustrate the constraint tree construction algorithm, and
                 each  ˆEi is also shown in the figure.

















                 Figure 25:  Illustration of the algorithm to construct the constraint tree.  The constraint tree is built on top of the
                 uncontracted edgesets of Vs,Es ={{e1},{e2},{e3},{e4},{e5}}.  The partitions U1,...,U5  are contracted with
                 Vs  in order.  For theith contraction, we show the value of  ˆEi  and show the constraint tree after that contraction
                 step.

                      In  the  algorithm, T (Es)  is  initialized  to  be  a  disconnected  graph  with  verticesEs.   For  the
                 ith  contraction  that  contracts Ui,  the  algorithm  updates  the T (Es)  so  that  the  leaves  ˆEi  will  be
                 connected.  The rules are as follows.

                     1.If    ˆEi are already connected inT (Es), we just keep the constraint tree unchanged.  For example,
                         in Fig.25the constraint tree is unchanged after we consider the fifth contraction, since            ˆE5 is
                         already connected.

                     2.If     ˆEi  is the union of multiple connected leaf subsets, then a vertex is added to T (Es)  whose
                         children are the root vertices of these connected leaf subsets.  In addition, this new vertex is



                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   38


Quantum
                         labeled as “unordered”.  In Fig.25, the constraint trees after both the first and the second
                         contraction belong to this case.

                     3.If     ˆEi  is  a  subset  of  the  union  of  multiple  connected  leaves  subsets  ¯E,  then  there  are  cases
                         where  ˆEi  cannot  be  adjacent  in  the  tree.   For  this  case,  a  vertex  is  added  to T (Es)  whose
                         children are the root vertices of  ¯E  and the vertex is labeled as “unordered”.  In Fig.25, the
                         constraint  trees  after  the  fourth  contraction  belongs  to  this  case.   For  the  other  cases,  we
                         can reorder the constraint tree and label some vertices as “ordered” to add the adjacency
                         constraints.  In Fig.25, the constraint trees after the third contraction belongs to this case.

                 E    Optimality of the edge set ordering algorithm

                 In  this  section,  we  prove  that  the  output  ordering  of  Algorithm3minimizes  the  Kendall-Tau
                 distance with the reference ordering under the adjacency constraint.(
                      LetP      T (Es))represents the set of orderings of the leaves of T (Es) constrained by T (Es).  Each
                 ordering in this set must adhere to all the adjacency relations specified by T (Es).  In TheoremE.2,
                 we establish that the output ordering produced by Algorithm3aims to minimize the Kendall-Tau
                 distance, as defined in Definition3, between itself and the reference ordering        τ,

                                                             σ(Es) = arg     min
                                                                           σ∈P(T (Es))dKT (σ,τ).                                               (6)

                 Before the presentation of TheoremE.2, we first present LemmaE.1that is used in the proof of
                 the theorem.  The lemma can be easily proved based on the definition of Kendall-Tau distance in
                 Definition3.

                 Lemma E.1.  Consider an ordering τ (C)  over a set C =C1∪C2, and let τ (C1), τ (C2)  denote the
                 restrictions of the ordering τ (C) to the subset C1, C2, respectively.  Consider another two orderings
                 σ(C1), σ(C2)  over C1, C2, respectively.  Then, we have
                         (                                   (                                  (                         (
                   dKT    τ (C),σ(C1)⊕σ(C2))=dKT               τ (C),τ (C1)⊕τ (C2))+dKT           τ (C1),σ(C1))+dKT        τ (C2),σ(C2)),  (7)

                 where τ (C1)⊕τ (C2)  denotes the concatenation of τ (C1), τ (C2).

                 Theorem E.2.  Given a reference ordering τ  and a guide tree T (Es), the output ordering of Algo-
                 rithm3is an optimal solution of the optimization problem,            minσ∈P(T (Es))dKT (σ,τ).
                                                                                                         (
                 Proof.  For each vertexv in the constraint treeT (Es), we let subtree                     v,T (Es))denote the subtree in
                 the constraint tree where the root vertex is v.  In addition, as is defined in Line15of Algorithm3,
                 we  use τv  to  denote  the  restriction  of  the  ordering τ  to  the  subset  represented  by  the  leaves  of(
                 subtree       v,T (Es)).  Below we prove that for each v∈T (Es),

                                                      f(v) = arg             min
                                                                     σ∈P(subtree(v,T (Es)))dKT (σ,τv),                                       (8)
                                                                                                                                  (
                 wheref(v) is defined in Line(    16of Algorithm3.  Since we output             f (r) withr = root                 T (Es)), and
                 subtree       r,T (Es))=T (Es), the output ordering satisfies f(r) = arg minσ∈P(T (Es))dKT (σ,τ).  This
                 finishes the proof.
                      For the base cases wherev is one of the leaf vertices, (8) holds since the set to be ordered only
                 contains one element thus the ordering is unique.
                      Now  consider  the  case  where v  is  a  non-leaf  vertex.   In  the  analysis  we  assume v  has  two
                 children, u1  and u2.  Note that the analysis can be easily generalized to the case of more than 2
                 children for both “unordered” and “ordered” labels.


                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   39


Quantum
                     Assume (8) holds for its children,  u1 and u2.  Consider the case where
                                              dKT (f(u1)⊕f(u2),τv)<dKT (f(u2)⊕f(u1),τv),                                 (9)
                so that Line16sets     f(v) as f(u1)⊕f(u2).  We then have
                           dKT (f(v),τv) =dKT (f(u1)⊕f(u2),τv)
                                             LemmaE.             1=   dKT (τv,τu1⊕τu2) +dKT (f(u1),τu1) +dKT (f(u2),τu2).       (10)

                The  first  term  in  (10)  reaches  the  minimum  since  (9)  holds.   Moreover,  the  last  two  terms  also
                reach the minimum since (8) holds for  u1 andu2.  These conditions implyf(v) satisfies (8).  Similar
                analysis can be applied for the case where dKT (f(u1)⊕f(u2),τv)>dKT (f(u2)⊕f(u1),τv).  This
                along with the based cases finish the proof.


                F    Lemmas in computational cost analysis

                This section provides lemmas for Theorem6.1, which shows that the asymptotic cost of the density
                matrix algorithm is upper-bounded by that of the canonicalization-based algorithm.  We demon-
                strate in LemmaF.3that when the input tensor network has a tree structure, both the density
                matrix algorithm and the canonicalization-based algorithm exhibit the same asymptotic cost for
                truncating the bond sizes in the tree tensor network.
                     The LemmaF.1and LemmaF.2below are used to prove LemmaF.3.
                Lemma  F.1.  Consider  a  tensor  network  with  a  tree  structure T  =  (VT,ET ).   Assuming  that
                changing a tree tensor network into the canonical form will not change any bond size of the network.
                For  two  adjacent  vertices z,v,  forming  canonical             formT (v,z)  has  the  same  asymptotic  cost  as
                forming density        matrixT (v,z).
                Proof.  For each edge set E′⊆ET , we let s(E′) = exp(w(E′)) denote the bond size of E′.  We also
                let Mv denote the tensor at each vertex v∈VT .
                     For the pair of adjacent vertices v,z, assume that canonical                  formT (u,v) already exist for all
                u∈N(v)\{z}. Let Ru denote the non-orthogonal core of canonical                        formT (u,v). To construct the
                form canonical(∑      formT (v,z), we first contract Mv with Ru for eachu∈N(v)\{z}, which yields a)
                cost of Θ        u∈N(v)\{z}s(ET (v))s(ET (u,v))         , and then use a QR decomposition to orthogonalize
                the tensor at v, which yields a cost of Θ (s(ET (v))s(ET (v,z))).  These steps make the overall cost
                                                                                              
                                                        Θ   ∑       s(ET (v))s(ET (u,v)).                                            (11)
                                                             u∈N(v)
                     We now consider the computation of density                matrixT (v,z) under the assumption that for all
                u∈N(v)\{z}, Lu = density               matrixT (u,v) already exist.  Below we consider the three different
                cases,
                    •  when N(v)\{z} =∅, the computation involves the contraction MvMTv ,
                    •  when N(v)\{z} ={u}, the computation involves the contraction (MvLu)MTv ,

                    •  when N(v)\{z} ={u1,u2}, the computation involves the contraction Mv(Lu1⊗ Lu2)MTv ,
                        which can be efficiently computed by performing the contractions Mv with Lu1 and Mv with
                        Lu2  first, and then contracting the outputs.(∑                                          )
                For  all  the  cases  above,  the  overall  cost  is  Θ         u∈N(v)s(ET (v))s(ET (u,v))        ,  which  equals  the
                cost of the canonical form.  Since both  canonical                formT (v,z) and  density        matrixT (v,z) have
                the same recursive relation,  computing  canonical               formT (u,v) has the same cost as that of the
                density     matrixT (u,v) for u∈N(v)\{z}.  This finishes the proof.



                Accepted in             2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   40


Quantum
                 Lemma F.2.  Consider  a  tensor  network  with  a  tree  structure T  = (VT,ET ),  where  each z∈ VT
                 represents a tensor Mz.  Letv∈VT  be a leaf vertex that represents Mv∈ Rav×bv, whereav  denotes
                 the size of the uncontracted modes and bv  denotes the size of the contracted modes incident on v,
                 and  let u = parent(T,v).  Given  that  density                 matrixT (u,v)  has  been  computed,  computing  the).
                 orthogonal matrix Uv  (Line11or18of Algorithm4) has a cost of                              Θ(avb2v

                 Proof.  For the case where av  = O (bv),  the algorithm first computes Lv  =  density                            matrixT (v)
                 with  a  cost  of  Θ(avb2v +a2vbv),  and  then  computes  Uv  via  a  low-rank  factorization  on  Lv ∈
                 Rav×av  with  the  maximum  rank  being r  = O (av),  which  costs  Θ(a2vr).    The  overall  cost  is).
                 Θ(avb2v +a2vbv +a2vr)= Θ(avb2v
                      For the case where av = Ω (bv), the algorithm first performs a QR decomposition of Mv  into),  then  computes  the  leading  singular  vectors
                 Uv ∈ Rav×bv, Rv ∈ Rbv×bv  with  a  cost  of  Θ(avb2v                      ).  Finally, Uv  is updated as the product
                 of RvLu  that is denoted  ˆUv∈ Rbv×r, which costs Θ(b3v                                                     ).  This finishes
                 Uv ˆUv with a cost of Θ(avbvr).  Overall the cost is Θ(avb2v +b3v +avbvr)= Θ(avb2v
                 the proof.

















                 Figure  26:   Illustration  of  the  difference  between  the  canonicalization-based  algorithm  and  the  density  matrix
                 algorithm.   The  upper  path  denotes  truncating  the  edge (u,v)  using  canonicalization,  and  the  lower  path  uses
                 the  density  matrix  algorithm.   In  the  lower  path,  the  orthogonal  matrix  is  calculated  as  the  leading  singular
                 vectors/eigenvectors of the density matrix density          matrixT (z).


                 Lemma F.3.  Consider a given tree tensor network T  = (VT,ET ).  Let σ :VT→{1,...,|VT|} be a
                 post-order DFS traversal of T  that shows the the tensor update ordering.  Assuming that changing
                 a  tree  tensor  network  into  its  canonical  form  will  not  change  any  bond  size  of  the  network,  the
                 asymptotic cost of the density matrix algorithm (Algorithm4) for truncating the modes in       T  is the
                 same as that of the canonicalization-based algorithm (Algorithm1) if both algorithms use the same
                 update ordering σ, and the same maximum bond size χ.

                 Proof.  Consider the step to update the tensor at a given vertex v∈VT .  Let Mv∈ Rav×bv, where
                 av  denote the size of the uncontracted modes and bv  denote the size of the contracted modes of
                 Mv.  Also letr = min (av,bv,χ) andu = parent(T,v).  We break down the cost of Algorithm4and
                 Algorithm1into 3 parts, and show that for each of the three parts, the costs of the two algorithms
                 are asymptotically equal.
                      In Algorithm1, the steps include 1) forming                    canonical   formT (u,v), 2) multiplying Mv  with
                 Ru∈ Rbv×bv, the non-orthogonal core of the canonical form, and 3) performing a rank-χ approxi-
                 mation to get Uv∈ Rav×r, ˆRu∈ Rr×bv, and 3) multiplying  ˆRu with Mu.
                      In  Algorithm4with  each  partition  contracted  into  a  tensor,  the  steps  include  1)  forming
                 the density matrix density            matrixT (u,v), 2) using density             matrixT (u,v) and Mv  to compute
                 Uv∈ Rav×r and Mv = UTv Mv, and 3) multiplying Mv∈ Rr×bv  with Mu.
                      The  comparison  between  the  two  algorithms  is  visualized  in  Fig.26.   It  can  be  seen  that
                 the  third  step  of  both  algorithms  have  the  same  asymptotic  cost.   For  the  first  step,  we  show
                 in  LemmaF.1that  both  algorithms  have  the  same  asymptotic  cost.   For  the  second  step,  the


                 Accepted in              2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   41


Quantum
                  canonicalization-based algorithm yields a cost of Θ(avb2v +avbvr)= Θ(avb2v)using the cost model

                  in Section2.2.  In addition, we show in LemmaF.2that the cost to compute                              Uv  in the density
                  matrix  algorithm  under  the  assumption  that  each  partition  is  contracted  into  a  tensor  is  also).  Since the multiplication UTv Mv  costs Θ (avbvr) = O(avb2v), the cost equals the cost of
                  Θ(avb2v
                  the canonicalization-based algorithm, thus finishing the proof.










































































                  Accepted in               2024-12-20, click title to verify.  Published under CC-BY 4.0.                                                   42


Quantum