          SOLVING THE QUANTUM MANY-BODY HAMILTONIAN
LEARNING PROBLEM WITH NEURAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS





                                 Timothy Heightman∗1,2, Edward Jiang1, and Antonio Acín1,3

   1ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08860 Castelldefels
                                                          (Barcelona), Spain
             2Quside Technologies SL, Carrer d’Esteve Terradas, 1, 08860 Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain
       3ICREA-Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain



                                                            ABSTRACT
          Understanding and characterising quantum many-body dynamics remains a significant challenge due
          to both the exponential complexity required to represent quantum many-body Hamiltonians, and the
          need to accurately track states in time under the action of such Hamiltonians. This inherent complexity
          limits our ability to characterise quantum many-body systems, highlighting the need for innovative
          approaches to unlock their full potential. To address this challenge, we propose a novel method to
          solve the Hamiltonian Learning (HL) problem—inferring quantum dynamics from many-body state
          trajectories—using Neural Differential Equations combined with an Ansatz Hamiltonian. Our method
          is reliably convergent, experimentally friendly, and interpretable, making it a stable solution for HL
          on a set of Hamiltonians previously unlearnable in the literature. In addition to this, we propose a
          new quantitative benchmark based on power laws, which can objectively compare the reliability and
          generalisation capabilities of any two HL algorithms.  Finally, we benchmark our method against
          state-of-the-art HL algorithms with a 1D spin-1/2 chain proof of concept.

Keywords  Hamiltonian Learning· Neural Ordinary Differential Equations· Quantum Many-body Systems, Quantum
Machine Learning

1    Introduction

Characterizing  many-body  Hamiltonians  is  central  to  the  development  of  quantum  information  and  processing
technologies. Once the true Hamiltonian generating unitary dynamics is known, we can use this knowledge to perform
error mitigation, optimal quantum control, quantum simulation, and device certification [1, 2, 3].  The Hamiltonian
Learning (HL) problem is defined as the task of inferring the Hamiltonian of a many-body system given some dataset
about that system.  In the context of quantum many-body systems and information processing, this task is difficult
for two key reasons. First, there is an exponential number of interactions that a many-body system can have, making
the search space exponentially large.  Second, there are sets of Hamiltonians that can be compatible with a data-set
taken from a quantum system; the answer may not be unique. This gives rise to two equally important formulations of
this problem shown in Fig. 1, hereby referred to as the white-box and black-box scenarios. In the white-box scenario,
we assume that the structure of the Hamiltonian is known, and inferring it simply involves tuning the interaction
coefficients to best match the dataset. This means the set of compatible Hamiltonians is relatively small, even being
unique in some cases [4, 5]. In contrast, the black-box scenario makes no such assumptions. Here, the structure of the
Hamiltonian must also be found by representing it as a sum over different quantum operators with weighted interaction
coefficients. Consequently, the set of Hamiltonians that are compatible with the data is larger, comprising of different
possible operators, as well as their relative weighting.




   ∗Corresponding author: theightman@icfo.eu
                                   Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs
















                                   Figure 1: The black-box and white-box Hamiltonian Learning (HL) scenarios are shown in (a) and (b) respectively.
                                   In both cases, the evolution is unitary, and we may control the length of time,t, for which the system evolves. In the
                                   white-box scenario (a), the structure of the true HamiltonianHT  =PjcjPj is known, but the coefficientscj∈ R are
                                   not. Whilst in the black-box scenario (b), neither the structure of the Hamiltonian,Pj, nor the coefficientscj are known.
                                   As discussed in Sec. 1, we choose to formulate the HL problem assuming control on the amount of time evolution, as it
                                   requires little optimal control. This makes data from time-evolved states experimentally friendly, provided the chosen
                                   evolution times are sufficiently short.


                                   There are a variety of approaches to try and tackle these two versions of the HL problem [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 4, 13, 5].
                                   By exploring which types of quantum states can be informative, theoretical studies have demonstrated the conditions
                                   required to create a dataset from which a Hamiltonian can be efficiently learned. For example, works such as [4, 5]
                                   show how one can determine Hamiltonians from eigenstates, whereas [13, 14, 15, 16] address the use of thermal
                                   states to generate data.  In contrast, [11, 5, 17, 18, 19] show that using a selection of states and evolving them for a
                                   controlled amount of time can also be meaningful. Intuitively this can be considered as using the trajectories of a few
                                   quantum states in order to find the most likely Hamiltonian. This idea is advantageous in practical settings as it involves
                                   preparing few quantum states, so there is less overhead in terms of state preparation when compared to other methods.
                                   Furthermore, evolving states under the action of the true Hamiltonian for variable amounts of time requires no optimal
                                   control [12]. We need only choose the time at which to measure the output states. For these reasons, we will focus on
                                   the task of inferring Hamiltonians from time-evolved states shown in Fig. 1.

                                   Despite these considerations, HL algorithms are yet to meet the needs of theoreticians, experimentalists, and industrial
                                   hardware providers. From the theoretical perspective of quantum simulation, state-of-the-art HL algorithms are so far
                                   incapable of learning sufficiently complex Hamiltonians. This means that the space of interactions from which we can
                                   infer a meaningful representation is limited when attempting to simulate. For this limited set of interactions, we can
                                   often simulate through simpler means than HL. Whilst on the experimental side, state-of-the-art HL algorithms cannot
                                   handle noisy many-body systems robustly. This limits their applicability in optimal control and error mitigation [20],
                                   where the imperfections arising from unforeseen interactions in the system and environment must be taken into account
                                   to meaningfully perform quantum control and correct for systematic errors. Where they are robust to noise, current
                                   algorithms are rarely scalable to the level needed in current NISQ hardware [21, 22, 23]. This is either because they
                                   work on too few spins or do not cover a sufficiently large interaction set to fully characterise and certify NISQ hardware.
                                   Recent advances in deep learning for quantum dynamical systems highlight the potential for its use to solve the HL
                                   problem [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 9, 10].  These advances have provided useful tools in special cases like quantum state
                                   tomography [29, 2] and variational Monte-Carlo [2, 30], gaining some traction in the wider quantum community
                                   [24, 26]. The philosophy behind recently developed deep-learning based methods is to use neural networks as function
                                   approximators.  For example, using neural networks to detect phase transitions posits the existence of a map from
                                   measurement data to probabilities of being in different phases [31]. Even when neural networks are used to represent
                                   quantum states, we rely on the existence of a function that maps configurations to probability amplitudes [32]. However,
                                   a general deep learning framework is yet to solve the above pressing issues in HL, because in HL the fundamental
                                   object we are aiming to represent is not a function, but an operator.  Whilst some progress has been made using
                                   so-called neural quantum states formalism to represent density operators [33], one cannot use such constructions to
                                   solve the HL problem. In simple terms, this is because our solution should facilitate unitary dynamics for any input
                                   quantum state (in principle), meaning an exponential number of forward passes would be needed to enumerate how
                                   every component of the basis evolves. Furthermore, the purpose of solving the HL problem is to return an estimator for
                                   the ground truth in an interpretable form. A neural network representation does not yet allow for such an interpretation.
                                   In this sense, our aim is to leverage deep learning techniques to construct propagators of quantum many-body systems


                                                                           Promise:                        2
(a)|ψ(t = 0)⟩                         U(t) = ?                             U(t)U†(t) = I
                                                                           No given Hamiltonian structure



                                                                           Promise:
(b)|ψ(t = 0)⟩                     U(t) =e−iHTt                             U(t)U†(t) = I andHT  =PjcjPj
                                                                           Pj known,cj unknown
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


in a way that facilitates an intepretable answer. Some recent works have explored this concept in the context where the
potential (and therefore the Hamiltonian) is known [34, 35, 36, 37]. Their objective in this case is to predict the time
evolution of states using neural networks and a given action, which is not available in our problem setting as it must be
inferred.  This means techniques such as Kernel Ridge Regression [35], non-recursive Artificial Intelligence-based
Quantum Dynamics [36], and One-Shot Trajectory Learning [37] cannot be used to solve the HL problem, where the
action is not known a-priori in both scenarios of Fig.1.

In this work, we introduce a general framework to solve the HL problem using the language of Neural Differential
Equations (NDE). A NDE uses a neural network to specify a system of differential equations. This sits in contrast to
typical uses of neural networks in the physical sciences, where a system of differential equations is given, and a neural
network is used to numerically solve that system [35, 37, 36]. Our method presents several advantages in terms of the
complexity of true Hamiltonians that are now learnable in our framework. It extends both the set of Hamiltonians now
learnable, and offers accurate estimates of its generalisation capabilities. We demonstrate these advantages by using
relatively small neural networks to benchmark our HL algorithm on 1D spin-1/2 chains for systems up to 8 spins.
We also propose a new benchmark for HL which is agnostic to the specifics of a given implementation. In brief, our
benchmark explores the power-law scaling behaviour of a HL algorithm outside its training data, allowing us to estimate
the quality and reliability of a HL algorithm independently of the Hamiltonians considered or the number of bodies.
Using this benchmark amongst others found across the literature, we demonstrate the capabilities of our framework
to comfortably surpass the state-of-the-art in terms of robustness, accuracy and generalisation capabilities. We then
explain how our method is able to learn complex Hamiltonians by analysing loss landscapes, using our numerical study
of 1D spin-1/2 chains as an instructive example.  Finally, we highlight the interpretability of our framework, using
curriculum learning to allow users to yield an interpretable estimate for the Hamiltonian, rather than a black-box neural
representation, as depicted in Fig. 1. Consequently, our method can be used in both the black-box scenario as done
in [10], as well as the white-box scenario of Fig. 1 [11]. This opens up possibilities to use our framework for error
mitigation, quantum optimal control, quantum simulation, and device certification [23, 38, 39].

The rest of this work is organised as follows:  In section 1.1 we formally define the HL problem.  In section 2 we
describe in detail how to use NDEs in quantum dynamics to solve the HL problem. We then recall how to construct
loss functions which are experimentally friendly, as was done in [11], and provide a curriculum learning procedure to
yield an interpretable solution to the HL problem.  In section 3 we probe the performance of our HL framework on
representative problems from 1D spin-1/2 chains, showing how the robustness, accuracy and experimental friendliness
surpass current state of the art methods such as [10, 11]. Finally, in section 4 we discuss the implications of our findings
in error mitigation, optimal quantum control, quantum simulation and device certification.

1.1    Statement of Problem

For spin-1/2 systems such as qubits, we consider the unitary dynamics of an initial state,|ψ(t = 0)⟩, governed by the
Time Dependent Schrödinger Equation (TDSE),
                                                              i| ˙ψ⟩ =HT|ψ⟩,                                                                            (1)
whereHT  is the true Hamiltonian for the system’s evolution. The HL problem aims to find a representation ofHT  that
generates the correct output for given input states as shown in Fig.1. In general, we wish for the learned representation
to be valid over arbitrary time-scales. However, in practise such a representation is usually valid for transient (short)
times [40], or the steady state [13, 41, 16].  In this manuscript, we will work with 1D, spin-1/2 chains ofN  spins,
whose Hamiltonian may always be expressed in the Pauli basis,

                                                                      4N−1X
                                                              HT  =          cjPj,                                                                           (2)
                                                                       j=0
wherePj∈PN  is an element of the Pauli group onN spins, andcj∈ R are real coefficients. However, we emphasise
that the philosophy behind our method goes beyond 1D spin-1/2 chains. We use them as an example for conceptual
clarity and numerical studies to benchmark against other methods, who have broadly done HL on 1D spin-1/2 chains
[13, 11, 16, 5, 4, 17, 19, 42].
Since there are an exponential number of learnable parameters over the whole Pauli group, many works make the HL
problem more tractable by aiming to learn subgroups ofPN , formed with assumptions such as random sparse support
[43], maximalk-Locality2 [44, 46], order of non-identity terms [47, 11, 13] , or homogeneity of the coefficientscj

    2often, geometrick-Locality is assumed, see [44, 45, 46] for further discussion.


                                                                        3
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


[48, 11]. Such assumptions limit the complexity of the true Hamiltonian, allowing previous HL methods to work by
reducing the number of free parameters that need to be found. However, these assumptions impose theoretical limits on
the effectiveness of HL, since they will be unable to accurately learn true Hamiltonians outside this subgroup. Intuitively,
with too few parameters to tune in an Ansatz, we cannot explore a space of Hamiltonians that is large enough to cover all
the possible interactions that may be happening in the physical system. It is therefore of interest to find a procedure which
works over as large a set of interactions as possible. Our procedure makes no assumptions on the order of Pauli operators,
nor the homogeneity of the coefficientscj, thus avoiding the limiting effects on expressivity shown by previous methods.

It is crucial to be able to infer this Hamiltonian efficiently from the data, i.e.  requiring sub-exponential resources
to accurately characterise the quantum many-body system of interest.  Whilst some procedures assume unbridled
access to the output state or true Hamiltonian [42], it has been shown that there are many cases where we can learn
a Hamiltonian from local measurements [4].  This means we can avoid cumbersome procedures like quantum state
and process tomography [49, 50, 51, 52] to construct estimators for the difference between the ground truth and our
estimates. In line to previous state-of-the-art works such as [11], we use an experimentally friendly format for training
data which involves sampling from the marginal distributions of a simulated output state. As such, the loss function is
constructed from binary bitstrings sampled from marginal distributions corresponding to compatible observable, as
might be done on idealised experimental hardware. See Sec. 3.1 for further discussion and examples.

2    Neural Differential Equations in Quantum Dynamics

A common practise in machine learning is to use deep neural networks as function approximators to solve a given
system of differential equations [53, 54, 55, 56]. Whereas the central idea of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
(NODEs) is that we use neural networks to specify differential equations [57, 58]. For example, letx(t)∈ RN , then we
may define
                                             dx
                                              dt (t) =fθ(x(t)),      x(t = 0) =x0,                                                      (3)
wherefθ : RN→ RN , is some neural architecture with trainable parametersθ. The input to the NODE is the initial
vectorx(t = 0) =x0, and the output isx(T ) which is obtained by numerical integration of equation (3) up to some
timeT . Eq.(3) exploits the Universal Approximation Theorem [59, 60] to predict the rate of change of a system of
differential equations.

The NODE can be used as a layer embedded in some larger neural network. As such, the solution,y(t), t∈ [0,T ],
forms a differentiable computation graph. We may tune this computational graph by varying its parameters,θ, until
the numerical solver outputs a trajectory,y(t), that matches some desired behaviourytrue(t). One pertinent example is
tuning with gradient descent,
                                                             θ←θ−ε∇θL(θ),                                                                          (4)
whereL : RN× RN→ R is any loss function mapping the tuple (y(t),ytrue(t)) to the reals. However, in principle, any
gradient-based optimisation strategy can work, for example we use the so-called ADAM optimiser [61].

For a comprehensive introduction to NODEs and their applications in dynamical systems, we refer the reader to [58] and
references therein. To integrate Eq.(3), the choice of numerical solver is somewhat arbitrary, and comes with the usual
trade-off between accuracy and speed3. From the perspective of HL, we can consider trying to learn a representation of
the true Hamiltonian,HT  from Eqs.(1,2) by specifying an Ansatz structure,HA(θ), and numerically integrating the
TDSE, with the set of parameters,θ, being tuned to best match observed trajectories. This formulation of parameter
tuning after numerical integration can put the work of [11, 10, 16] into the language of NDEs. For example, consider
using as an Ansatz the Transverse Field Ising Model (TFIM) Hamiltonian,

                                                  HTFIM =X         JijXiXj +X           hkZk,                                                            (5)
                                                              ⟨i,j⟩                 k

whereXj is the Paulix-matrix on sitej,Zk is the Pauliz-matrix on sitek,hk is a local transverse field, and⟨i,j⟩
specifies that only nearest neighbour sites are coupled. For this Ansatz, the tunable parameter setθ is ={Jij,hk}∈ R.


    3In this manuscript we use the diffrax package [58] which integrates seamlessly with the Python-based numerical computation
library, jax, opting for the third-order Runge Kutta method [62] for our numerical integration. See Sec. 3 for further discussion on
our implementation and numerical study.


                                                                        4
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


By comparing the output states found by numerically integrating
                                                Z t+∆t     d                       Z t+∆t
                          |ψ(t + ∆t);θ⟩ =                 dt′|ψ(t′)⟩dt′ =−i
                                                  t                                  t   HTFIM(θ)|ψ(t′)⟩dt′,                             (6)
with true output states,
                                                     |ψ(t)⟩true =e−iHTt|ψ(t = 0)⟩                                                                 (7)
we can construct a simple Loss function,L :H×H→ R to perform parameter updates with gradient based rules
such as the given example in Eq.(4).  This gives the architecture shown in Fig.2b, hereby referred to as the vanilla
model. We note here that all Ansatz-based HL algorithms such as [11, 10, 16] can be cast as vanilla models, tuning
theθ according to different Loss functions regardless of whether they focus on experimental friendliness [11], or the
Black-Box scenario [10]. In this langauge, we see these HL algorithms are limiting if there are additional terms not
included inHA(θ). Furthermore, as we will show in Sec. 3, using a vanilla HL algorithm causes convergence issues
due to the loss landscape ofθ, even on a relatively small number of spins.

2.1    Combining Ansatz with NODEs

Consider a representation ofHT  decomposed as the sum of an Ansatz Hamiltonian,HA(θ), and a NODE with a Neural
Network (NN) architecture acting as a map NN :H θ−→H,
                                                         HT  =HA(θ) + NN(φ),                                                                      (8)
with independent,  tunable parameters θ, φ for the Ansatz and NN respectively.   Under this decomposition,  the
Schrödinger equation reads,
                                              i| ˙ψ(t)⟩ =HA(θ)|ψ(t)⟩ + NN(|ψ(t)⟩ ;φ),                                                       (9)
which can be expressed as,
                             Z t+∆t     d                       Z t+∆t                               Z t+∆t
          |ψ(t + ∆t)⟩ =                dt′|ψ(t′)⟩dt′ =−i
                               t                                  t   HA(θ)|ψ(t′)⟩dt′−i               t         NN(|ψ(t′)⟩ ;φ)dt′.      (10)
for numerical integration. In integral form, we may represent the Schrödinger equation as a computational graph with a
NODE component, as shown in Fig. 2c. This architecture sits in contrast with the Ansatz-based methods employed by
state-of-the-art protocols in [11, 10], shown in Fig.2b.

2.2    Measurements and Loss Function

In order to provide feedback to the NODE, we must design a function,L :H×H→ R, which compares the estimated
time-evolved state,|ψ(t;θ,φ)⟩ to the ground truth,|ψT (t)⟩, evolved under the action ofHT . To make our loss function
experimentally friendly, we will assume that access to|ψT (t)⟩ can only be achieved by sampling from compatible
marginal distributions of|ψT (t)⟩, corresponding to Pauli measurements. As such, we will sample from the marginals
of the true output state ,|ψT (t)⟩, giving a dataset,D, comprising binary measurement outcomes for each Pauli basis
measurement chosen at random. Using this dataset, we can then compute the log-likelihood that such a dataset can
be sampled from the estimated time-evolved state,|ψ(t;θ,φ)⟩. As per [11], forJ time-stamps, withM  repeats per
measurement, andK different random Pauli basis, we have|D| =MKJ. Given that we will also vary the input state,
this creates a dataset with|D| =MKJL points, whereL is the number of different chosen input states. In order to
construct a loss function from this data-set, we note that since our pipeline is numerical, we do have full access to the
estimator|ψ(t;θ,φ)⟩ of the underlying true output|ψT (t)⟩. As such, it is possible to use the Born rule to calculate the
probabilities of observing bitstrings,b, in the dataset,
                                                     p b|ψθ(t)⟩ =|⟨b|ψθ(t)⟩|2.                                                               (11)
From here, we can use the probabilities to construct our loss function as the average negative log-likelihood of these
outcomes,
                                                  L(|ψθ⟩ ;D) =−X             log|⟨b|ψθ⟩|2,                                                          (12)
                                                                       b∈D′
whereD′⊂D is a subset of the dataset corresponding to bitstrings acquired from evolving the correct input state, and
measuring at the same timestamp as the estimator.
This enables us to create an update rule for the ODE via back propagation of the loss function to the trainable
parameters,θ andϕ of the Ansatz Hamiltonian and NN, respectively.



                                                                        5
                                          Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs
















                                                                                                              (a)




















                                                                                                              (b)



























                                                                                                              (c)
                                          Figure 2: Architectures of the models used to simulate the time evolution of the parameterised HamiltonianH(θ). (a)
                                          The numerically exact time evolution under the Hamiltonian. (b) The approximate time evolution through integrating
                                          the Schrodinger equation, hereby referred to as the vanilla model.  (c) The time evolution through integrating the
                                          Schrodinger equation with an added corrective term to the right-hand-side.



                  |ψ0⟩|ψ0⟩                                                                                     6



                  |ψ0⟩|ψ⟩|ψ⟩             −iH(θ)−iH(θ)e−iHTt




        NN(φ)                       ××       ×
         ODEint



                                    +
ODEint
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


Depending on the NN architecture, the NN component of the architecture in Fig. 2c can be much more expressive that
HA(θ), meaning it is powerful enough to overfit the training data and completely ignore the contribution ofHA(θ). For
example, a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), which has fully connected layers, is able to correlate any element of an
input wavefunction with any other. Physically, this would correspond to an action which couples every spin to every
other spin in our many-body system. This is of concern since it is beneficial for our representation to be intepretable in
the white-box scenario from Fig.1 - which is the case when as much of the output of Fig.2c as has large a contribution
as possible from the analytic component,HA(θ), rather than the NN. Hence, we should seek to make the architecture
be as dependent on the ansatz component as possible. We may address this problem with heavy regularisation of the
NN [63], and with a curriculum learning strategy [64, 65] discussed below. In the black-box scenario of Fig.1, we can
ourselves make an ansatz and use curriculum learning in order to estimate the extent to which our ansatz is correct.
Further details can be found in Sec. 2.3.

2.3    Curriculum learning

As stated above, the expressive power of the NN means its contribution to the output state could dominate over the
Ansatz Hamiltonian.  The reason for this is that the NN receives as input a vectorised state and is fully connected.
Thus, through the hidden, fully connected layers, the NN is able to enact transformations that couple state coefficients
that would otherwise be uncoupled with just the Ansatz Hamiltonian alone4, as well as being able to couple the same
coefficients of the input state,|ψT (t = 0)⟩, as the Ansatz Hamiltonian. Consequently, the NN is in principle able to
dominate over the Ansatz Hamiltonian, causing complications in the white-box scenario in Fig.1. However, if we seek
an analytic answer to the HL problem (as opposed to simply finding a neural representation of it, solving the black-box
scenario with no interpretation), we wish for as much of the output as possible to come from the Ansatz. To enable this,
we use the principle of curriculum learning. In short, curriculum learning is a training strategy that gradually increases
in complexity as training progresses. To that end, we use the following curriculum

Curriculum 1

        i.Warm-up phase: the Hamiltonian parameters, θ, and the NN parameters,ϕ, are trained simultaneously.
       ii.  First phase: the NN is switched off 5 for both the forward and backward passes. The Hamiltonian parameters,
           θ, are trained.
      iii.Second phase: the Hamiltonian parameters,  θ are frozen and the NN’s parameters,ϕ, are trained.

Our reasoning for the warm-up phase comes from the fact that works such as [11, 10, 66] only converge to the correct
ground truth for specific parameter initialisations. This sensitivity to initial parameters is due to a barren loss landscape,
local minima, or insensitivity of the loss function to variation of the parameters in these initialisation regions.  See
Sec.  3 and Fig.3 for further discussion.  In practise, we found that having a warm-up phase avoids this problem
entirely. Further discussion on the curriculum and initialisation can be found in Sec. 3.2 where we directly compare
the robustness to the results in [11]. Finally, we note that for the case where Curriculum 1 fails to be robust, we can
further break the HL problem down into smaller parts. Since our proof of concept up toN = 8 spins converges with
Curriculum 1 for our test set detailed below, we reserve a brief discussion on this extended curriculum to Appendix 5.


3    Results

In this section, we benchmark the performance our algorithm on 1D spin-1/2 chains for,N∈{3,..., 8} spins. We
begin by explaining the datasets used in training, detailing the Hamiltonians tested, and neural network architecture.
We choose a wide variety of Hamiltonians which include higher order polynomials of Pauli operators, and non-ergodic
systems [67, 68]. We also choose Hamiltonians from state-of-the-art works such as [11, 10] in order to benchmark our
work against current methods. We then probe the robustness of our algorithm by evaluating its success rates on our test
Hamiltonians, and evaluate its performance outside of training times using our new benchmark defined in Sec. 3.3.
Finally, we analyse our algorithm’s limitations and experimental friendliness.


    4Assuming that the Ansatz is an element of a subgroup of PN , otherwise it has an exponentially large number of parameters
rendering it untrainable for large system sizes.
    5Note that this is different from freezing the NN parameters,ϕ.


                                                                        7
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


3.1    Datasets and Ground Truth

To find some reasonable test Hamiltonians, we consider the work of [11], where the authors use a 1D Heisenberg spin
chain, with homogeneous coupling coefficients and a local transverse field,

                                        N−1X                                                      NX
                                 H =          [JxXiXi+1 +JyYiYi+1 +JzZiZi+1] +                       hiXi,                                      (13)
                                        i=1                                                      i=1
where the number of spins,n, ranges between 6 and 100. On the other hand, the authors of [10] use a transverse field
Ising model with 9 spins as their example. We test our method on the 1D Heisenberg spin chain from [11], as well as
the following modifications to the Heisenberg Hamiltonian to probe the capabilities of our method on more complex
Hamiltonians:

       1.The Anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian:

                                              N−1X                                                      NX
                                      H1 =          [JxiXiXi+1 +JyiYiYi+1 +JziZiZi+1] +                     hiXi                              (14)
                                               i=1                                                     i=1
       2.The next-nearest-neighbour Heisenberg Hamiltonian:



                                    NX                                  N−1X
                           H2 =         [hxiXi +hyiYi +hziZi] +               [JxiXiXi+1 +JyiYiYi+1 +JziZiZi+1]
                                    i=1                                  i=1
                                               N−2X
                                            +        [KxiXiXi+2 +KyiYiYi+2 +KziZiZi+2]                                             (15)
                                                i=1
       3.The third-order Heisenberg Hamiltonian:


                                    NX                                  N−1X
                           H3 =         [hxiXi +hyiYi +hziZi] +               [JxiXiXi+1 +JyiYiYi+1 +JziZiZi+1]
                                    i=1                                  i=1
                                               N−2X
                                            +        [KxiXiXi+1Xi+2 +KyiYiYi+1Yi+2 +KziZiZi+1Zi+2]                     (16)
                                                i=1
       4.The PXP Hamiltonian [69, 70], which is one of the simplest examples of a non-ergodic Hamiltonian:

                                                                    N−1X
                                                            H4 =          JiPi−1XiPi+1                                                           (17)
                                                                     i=2
          wherePk =|0⟩⟨0|k is the projector onto the|0⟩ state for thei-th spin.
       5.The dense nearest-neighbour Hamiltonian:

                                                 NX                                 N−1X  X    JABi  AiBi+1                                (18)
                                        H5 =        [hxiXi +hyiYi +hziZi] +
                                                i=1                                  i=1  A,B

          where in the second sum,A andB are each taken over the Pauli matrices{X,Y,Z}.

We generate our ground-truth dataset using an exact state-vector simulation of the system evolving under the true
Hamiltonian, whose computational graph is shown in Fig.2a. To simplify training data collection from hardware, we
can use short interaction times, ensuring the system’s coherence isn’t needed for long periods.
For all system sizesN∈{3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}, we useL = 5 randomly chosen initial computational basis states,J  = 5
timestamps corresponding tot∈{0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} (in units of ℏ),K = 200 Pauli bases chosen at random from
the uniform distribution of Pauli strings, andM  = 100 shots per each combination of state, timestamp, and Pauli
measurement. This means that for fewer than 4 bodies, the Pauli measurements can be informationally complete, but


                                                                      8
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


not necessarily since the Pauli-basis measurements are sampled at random. For all datasets higher than 4, the number of
shots limits the measurement set to always be informationally incomplete.
For each of our Hamiltonians, we sample the true parameters,cj uniformly from the interval [−1, 1] to test the robustness
over 50 different samples. This interval assumes that all parameters are of the same order, however our method can also
apply when true parameters vary over more orders of magnitudes. We note here that this means our proof of concept
does not consider Hamiltonians with critical points and phase transitions. However, sinceN = 8 bodies in our study,
effects such as power-law decays, spin-spin correlations, gapped and gapless phases and different excitation spectra do
not dominate dynamics for this relatively small number of bodies [71, 72].
In order to estimate the generalisation capabilities of our algorithm, we define the Infidelity Loss of an output quantum
state,
                                       L |ψT (t)⟩,|ψ(t;θ)⟩ = 1−F |ψT (t)⟩,|ψ(t;θ)⟩,                                            (19)

whereF is any fidelity function, in our case we use the overlap,F =|⟨ψ1|ψ2⟩|2.
We can use this loss on testing datasets by allowing our system to evolve past its training times. For this test set, we use
the same ground-truth parameters across all experiments for comparison purposes, tracking 5 different basis states.

We now proceed to understand the performance of our algorithm in terms of three aspects: robustness, accuracy and
extrapolation behaviour, and experimental friendliness.

3.2    Robustness

To test the robustness of our algorithm, we can initialise each of models described on Eqs.(13-18) for different ground
truth initialisations. We may then evaluate the robustness by estimating how often our algorithm converges for different
ground truth parameters. To that end, letθ be the set of ground-truth parameters for Hamiltonians in our test set Eqs.(13-
18).  For example, the Anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian in Eq.(14) hasθ ={Jxi,Jyi,Jzi,hzi}, i∈{1,...,N},
whilstθ ={hxi,hyi,hzi,Jxi,Jyi,Jzi,Kxi,Kyi,Kzi}, i∈{1,...N} for the next-nearest-neighbour Heisenberg Hamilto-
nian of Eq.(15). Furthermore, let ˜θ be the set of estimators for the ground-truth parameters for Hamiltonians in our test
set, Eqs.(14-18). We may then define the relative absolute error between the true Hamiltonian parameters,θ, and the
predicted parameters, ˜θ, as

                                                               ϵ(˜θ) =∥θ− ˜θ∥∥θ∥  ,                                                                          (20)

where∥·∥ is the L1 norm.
We say that the learning algorithm is successful if the relative absolute error is lower than some threshold, which we set
to approximately 0.1. This choice of threshold is inconsequential since in all experiments the separation of the relative
errors between successful trials and unsuccessful trials is large. We chose 0.1 because it is approximately the noise rate
of state-of-the-art hardware’s two-qubit gate infidelity [21].
The success rates of the vanilla model and the neural ODE model on the 6 Hamiltonians above are shown in table
(1).  We see that the vanilla model has a significant probability of failure across our test set when compared to the
neural augmentation’s performance. Considering the loss landscape of these two models in Fig.3, we infer that this
this is due to their difference in sensitivity to parameter initialization.  In the vanilla model from Fig.2a (with only
the Ansatz parameters), the loss landscape is more barren and ridden with local minima, thus making it difficult for
effective gradient-based parameter tuning as shown in Fig.3. However, the neural ODE model from Fig.2c has success
rates close to 100% for all of the Hamiltonians evaluated up toN = 8 bodies. Considering Fig.3, which shows how
the loss landscape changes under the neural augmentation of Fig.  2c, this neural augmentation improves the loss
landscape to one with fewer local minima and barren plateaus. Thus we see that adding the neural augmentation helps
to remove the sensitivity of the architecture to initialization of its parameters. In a smoother loss landscape, there are
more initialisations of the Ansatz parameters which will converge towards the global optimum.
This is further reinforced by the fact that the vanilla model is much more robust on Hamiltonians such as the dense
nearest-neighbour landscape of Eq.(18), whose loss landscape appears smooth with all gradients pointing almost directly
to the global optimum. In this instance, the Neural ODE model makes little change to the loss landscape near the global
minimum, meaning the vanilla model and Neural ODE model have similar performance for this Hamiltonian. Whereas
for the PXP Hamiltonian of Eq.(17), the ruggedness of the loss landscape in Fig.3 explains the almost vanishing success
rate of the vanilla model in learning the PXP Hamiltonian.


                                                                        9
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs










































Figure 3: The loss landscapes of for two parameters in the anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian, the PXP Hamiltonian,
and the dense nearest-neighbour Hamiltonian respectively from left to right.  The center of each plot is the global
minimum, and the axes are chosen as two random orthogonal directions in the parameter space. The top row contains
the landscapes for the vanilla model architecture from [11], shown in Fig.2b.  The bottom row contains landscapes
for the Neural ODE model from Fig.2c, over the same Hamiltonians, with the same ground-truth parameters. We see
clearly in the centre two plots that the Neural ODE model can make significant improvements to the loss landscape in
terms of the number of local minima, as well as having a smoothing effect to the ruggedness of the PXP Hamiltonian’s
landscape. This effect is visible in Table 1, where the convergence rate of the Neural ODE model greatly surpasses
the vanilla model. Notice that for the left panels (Heterogeneous Heisenberg), the Neural ODE model has changed
the loss landscape in the lower-left corner to have fewer saddle points and a more even loss landscape. This makes it
more likely to approach the global minimum when optimising as there are more directions from which one can arrive at
the local minimum. However, since the change is relatively small, the Neural ODE causes only a small boost in the
success rate, as shown in Table 1. Finally, notice that for the right panels (Dense NN), the Neural ODE makes almost
no change to the loss landscape near the global minimum. We see this reflected in the almost equivalent success rates of
the vanilla model vs the Neural ODE model in Table 1.











                                                                     10
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


                                          Hamiltonian               N     Vanilla     Neural ODE
                                                                     3      66%           100%
                                                                     4      86%           100%
                                      Heisenberg (Eq.13)             5      94%           100%
                                                                     6      64%           100%
                                                                     7      52%           100%
                                                                     8      52%           100%
                                                                     3      28%            96%
                                                                     4      46%            96%
                                           Anisotropic               5      34%            94%
                                      Heisenberg (Eq.14)             6      32%            96%
                                                                     7      18%            96%
                                                                     8      16%            96%
                                                                     3      12%           100%
                                                                     4      12%           100%
                                          PXP (Eq.17)                5       6%           100%
                                                                     6       2%           100%
                                                                     7       0%            98%
                                                                     8       0%            94%
                                                                     3      94%           100%
                                                                     4      98%           100%
                                       Dense NN (Eq.18)              5      96%            98%
                                                                     6      98%            98%
                                                                     7      88%            98%
                                                                     8      98%            98%
                                                                     3      18%            98%
                                                                     4      56%           100%
                                   Heisenberg NNN (Eq.15)            5      48%            92%
                                                                     6      50%            86%
                                                                     7      46%            96%
                                                                     8      56%            94%
                                                                     3      54%           100%
                                                                     4      68%           100%
                                            3rd order                5      70%           100%
                                      Heisenberg (Eq.16)             6      68%            86%
                                                                     7      78%            96%
                                                                     8      64%            94%
Table 1: Success rates of the vanilla model in [11] and the proposed neural ODE model for the 6 Hamiltonians indicated,
calculated over 50 runs with random parameter initialization.



3.3    Accuracy and Extrapolation Behaviour via New Benchmark

We can also evaluate the performance of our algorithm by testing how it generalises to times unseen in its training.
Here, we focus exclusively on the neural ODE model, as the vanilla model lacks the robustness needed to reliably learn
more complex Hamiltonians in the test set Eqs.(13 - 18). For this purpose, we generate random initial computational
basis states not seen during training, and perform a simulation up toT  = 20 of the learned neural ODE model (20× the
time used in training). We do this for each of the different Hamiltonians and system sizes, keeping the ground truth
parameters fixed. We note that this is different from the test set used to establish robustness, where the ground truth
parameters were varied in order to ensure convergence over a range of different true parameters. The results of this
testing are shown in Fig. (4).
We see that the neural ODE model is able to generalize to longer simulation times than seen in training.  For up to
N = 8 spins and over the Hamiltonians described in Sec. 3.1, Fig.4 shows a fidelity of approximately 99% for ten times
the training times seen. More interestingly, we observe from Fig. (4) that the infidelity as a function of the simulation
time can be fitted to a power law:

                                                  1−F |ψ(t)⟩,|ψ′(t)⟩ =Atb,                                                              (21)


                                                                   11
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs
























Figure 4: Infidelities between the simulated time-evolved state of the neural ODE and the true time-evolved state. The
boundary of the shaded region on the left represents the training time (i.e. feeding back at this boundary point only),
and to the right of it are testing times. Here, the red dashed line marks the 1% error boundary, past which the model has
more than a 1% error. (Left) The fidelities as a function of the simulation time for the 6 Hamiltonians indicated, where
here we fix the number of spins toN = 8. (Right) The fidelities as a function of the simulation time for different system
sizes, where here we use the PXP Hamiltonian as this was heuristically found to be the most difficult as per Table 1.


where|ψ(t)⟩ and|ψ′(t)⟩ are the ground-truth and predicted states at timet, respectively, andA andb are positive
constants whose values depend on the particular Hamiltonian and system size. This power law will start to fail at the
point when the predicted state diverges from the true state. However, Fig.4 shows that for our model, the power law
holds for sufficiently smallt, at least up to twenty times the evolution time seen during training.
The coefficientsA andb of the power law can be determined empirically through linear regression. For the numerical
experiments in Fig.(4), the power law coefficients are shown in Table (2).  The power law in time past the training
region in Fig.4 shows our algorithm has a global error (measured in terms of the Infidelity Loss from Eq.(21)) which
empirically scales polynomially with an exponent 1≤b≤ 2 for all the Hamiltonians tested. This indicates that our
algorithm can generalise with at most a quadratic amount of error in time for the tested examples, implying that the
neural augmentation indeed does form a representation of the unitary dynamics, rather than overfitting to the training
data. Furthermore, the accuracy of the exponent, in terms of the error values of Table (2), shows that our method can
generalise beyond the training time with a predictable amount of uncertainty in its estimates for up to twenty times the
training data point.


Power Laws can Benchmark Hamiltonian Learning Algorithms

Despite the variety of approaches to perform HL in diverse settings, there is not yet a systematic, quantitative means
of comparison for HL algorithms that is agnostic to their inner workings.   Whilst some metrics of Hamiltonian
complexity such as the so-called V-score [45] have been defined, the complexity measure is as estimate of simulation
hardness.  This makes metrics like the V-score appropriate in the black-box scenario of Fig.1, as the main use-case
of black-box Hamiltonian Learning is to construct a simulation of the ground truth.  In contrast, the V-score does
not take into account the difficulty in tuning a known structure, as per the white-box scenario in Fig.1.  Nor does
it consider the sensitivity of successful convergence to a HL algorithm’s initial conditions.  This is because we are
trying to infer a given system’s unknown Hamiltonian from data, rather than attempt to simulate a known Hamil-
tonian. Therefore, users and researchers of HL currently face difficulties in deciding which algorithm best fits their needs.

We believe that the scaling behaviour of Eq.(21) provides a reasonable benchmark for the ability of a generic HL
algorithm to generalise outside training data.  This is because the exponent of the power law shows two important
aspects of generalisation.  First, a lower value for the exponent implies that a HL algorithm can maintain accuracy


                                                                      12
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


                             Hamiltonian                              A                                 b
                              Heisenberg              3.56× 10−4± 7.66× 10−6                1.364± 7.42± 10−3
                      Anisotropic Heisenberg          5.15× 10−4± 5.56× 10−6                1.384± 3.74× 10−3
                                  PXP                 7.56× 10−4± 6.74× 10−6                1.678± 3.10× 10−3
                              Dense NN                5.49× 10−4± 8.75× 10−6                1.504± 5.51× 10−3
                          Heisenberg NNN              1.10× 10−3± 1.30× 10−5                1.299± 4.09× 10−3
                        3rd order Heisenberg          1.09× 10−3± 1.07× 10−5                1.347± 3.38× 10−3
                             System size                       A                                 b
                                   3           2.93× 10−5± 9.31× 10−7                1.686± 1.09× 10−2
                                   4           4.72× 10−5± 6.10× 10−7                1.720± 4.47× 10−3
                                   5           9.02× 10−5± 1.38× 10−6                1.705± 5.28× 10−3
                                   6           1.80× 10−4± 3.81× 10−6                1.758± 7.30× 10−3
                                   7           2.73× 10−3± 5.52× 10−6                1.759± 6.97× 10−3
                                   8           7.56× 10−3± 6.74× 10−6                1.678± 3.10× 10−3
Table 2: Empirically-determined coefficients of the power law in equation (21) with their standard deviations. (Top)
The coefficients for the different Hamiltonians with the system size fixed toN  = 8.  (Bottom) The coefficients for
different system sizes with the Hamiltonian fixed as the PXP model.



for longer periods in time in a dataset unseen by training. Second, an exponent with low error means we can reliably
understand the amount of uncertainty in the estimator of the output. With a higher error in the exponent of Eq.(21), we
see a breakdown in the generalisation capabilities of a HL algorithm; being unable to rely on the uncertainty in the
scaling behaviour means the algorithm has high variability in its ability to converge, and is not guaranteed to remain
accurate outside its training data. There are several advantages of using power-laws to benchmark HL algorithms. First,
Fig.4 shows the scaling law was observed to have similar coefficients over a diverse set of 1D spin-1/2 chains. As such,
we assert that theb coefficient and its error are indicative of our HL algorithms’s performance beyond our examples
from Eqs.(13 - 18), and can help future users gauge how well our HL algorithm could perform on different examples not
covered in this manuscript. Second, seeing a similar range ofb values independently of the number of bodies, indicates
that our protocol is scalable should we be able to tame the exponential scaling of the input state vector (See Sec. 4 for
further discussion). These factors indicate that the range of values ofb is a property of the algorithm, rather than the
ground-truth examples tested. This is important because it distinguishes this benchmark from the so-called V-score
[45], which is dependent on the Hamiltonian to be learned by construction. Finally, we note that we can calculate theb
coefficient for any HL algorithm. Regardless of its intricacies, a HL algorithm should return an estimate for the true
Hamiltonian. With this estimate, we can choose some test states unseen during training and evolve them in time past
the training region. This is possible for any HL algorithm because the only three objects needed are the initial states, the
true Hamiltonian, and the estimated Hamiltonian. All of these are available for both scenarios shown in Fig.1.

3.4    Experimental Friendliness

We can evaluate the experimental friendliness of our algorithm by understanding how much training data is required
to reach a given relative error described in Eq.(20). This is important to ensure that our framework is experimentally
friendly, since if the number of Pauli measurements required to effectively learn the Hamiltonian is too large, then the
ground-truth dataset would be difficult to generate and the framework would not be useful in practice.
Since our set-up in Fig.1 does not allow any optimal control [12], we expect the scaling behaviour for the amount
of data needed to reach a given relative error to be governed by the Standard Quantum Limit.  To this end, we vary
the number of Pauli measurementsK∈{3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000} and keep the rest of the dataset parameters the
same as Sec.  3.1.  We evaluate our neural ODE model on the PXP Hamiltonian given in Eq.(17) on a system with
N  = 8 spins, since this Hamiltonian was empirically found to be the most difficult according to Table (1), giving a
worst-case-scenario scaling behaviour.  The results can be seen in Fig.5, which evaluates the learning algorithm by
observing how the robustness and the relative error scale with the number of Pauli measurements used.
Owing to the results of [12], we see an approximate power law scaling past a certain minimum threshold number
of measurements.  In this instance for the PXP Hamiltonian of Eq.(17), we see qualitatively that this is around 30
Pauli bases. This means that we can predictably improve the robustness and the accuracy of the learning algorithm by
increasing the number of Pauli measurements. More importantly, the fact that we do not see a power law for a small
number (<30 in Fig.5) of Pauli measurements indicates that there is some minimum number of Pauli measurements in


                                                                    13
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


order for the learning algorithm to be reliable. We also note here that changing the measurement process to one with
limited or total quantum control could allow us to surpass the standard quantum limit [73, 74, 12].

























Figure 5:  The impact of the number of Pauli measurements on the robustness and the relative error of the learning
algorithm using the neural ODE model. Here we use the PXP Hamiltonian on a system of 8 bodies to give a worst-case
scaling as Table 1 shows this was the most difficult Hamiltonian considered in our examples from Eq.(13 - 18).


4    Conclusion and Outlook

In this contribution, we introduced the foundational concepts for how to use Neural ODEs to solve the HL problem
on quantum many-body spin systems, as well as preliminary results that highlight its reliability and expressibility on
a number of previously unsolved HL problems in 1D spin-1/2 chains.  In terms of performance, we believe Neural
Differential Equations open new avenues for solving the HL problem, which will allow researchers to better characterise
a more diverse set of many-body quantum systems.  Due to its innate interpretability, we focused on the white-box
scenario. However, as discussed in Sec. 2.3, our architecture is quite capable of forming a black-box representation
when the NODE component dominates over a Hamiltonian ansatz. From the perspective of quantum simulation, our
work can hence be used in both the black-box and white-box scenarios. For error mitigation, our work can be used to
learn the free Hamiltonian of quantum hardware, allowing users to systematically diagnose the most likely Hamiltonian
in their system, and correct for any unexpected interactions.  This also applies to those wishing to perform device
certification.  By using our HL framework on controlled quantum operations, we can verify that they are working
correctly by inferring the Hamiltonian maximising the log-likelihood of observed data. In all four of these uses, we
believe our new benchmark offers the most informative assessment of the quality of HL algorithms. This is because this
benchmark can be considered as a property of the algorithm rather than the Hamiltonian to be learned. To perform the
aforementioned tasks, we need to know how well a neural architecture works outside its training times on unseen basis
states. The coefficient,b, from Eq.(21) captures these aspects in a fine grained way, irrespective of the V-Score [45] of
the Hamiltonian to be learned.
However, we note here that our work has three main challenges to facilitate broader use of HL algorithms. First, our
method works in the state-vector formalism of unitary quantum dynamics. This means that the Neural ODE’s input size
scales exponentially with the number of bodies. Second, the loss function relies on being able to accurately estimate the
log-likelihood of a small number of Pauli strings, potentially inducing biases to the loss function if the number of
measurement bases is not sufficient, or in the case of noisy measurements. An interesting research direction comes
from the idea of tracking expectation values in time, for example via techniques like classical shadows [75], to address
this. Finally, being in the NISQ era of quantum technology, our algorithm should be able to perform reliably in noisy
dynamical settings, encapsulated by open-system quantum dynamics, rather than the unitary case. As the first paper in a
planned series, the next works aim to systematically investigate the extent to which Neural ODEs can be used to solve


                                                                      14
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


the Hamiltonian Learning problem in these settings, addressing the above limitations.


Acknowledgments

We would like to extend our thanks to Frederik Wilde, Marcin Plodzien, Mark Thomas, Jose Ramon Martinez for their
insightful discussions and feedback on the manuscript. This project was supported by Government of Spain (Severo
Ochoa CEX2019-000910-S, Quantum in Spain, FUNQIP and European Union NextGenerationEU PRTR-C17.I1), the
European Union (PASQuanS2.1, 101113690 and Quantera Veriqtas), Fundació Cellex, Fundació Mir-Puig, Generalitat
de Catalunya (CERCA program), the ERC AdG CERQUTE and the AXA Chair in Quantum Information Science.

References

 [1]  Armands Strikis, Dayue Qin, Yanzhu Chen, Simon C Benjamin, and Ying Li.  Learning-based quantum error
      mitigation. PRX Quantum, 2(4):040330, 2021.
 [2]  Elizabeth R Bennewitz, Florian Hopfmueller, Bohdan Kulchytskyy, Juan Carrasquilla, and Pooya Ronagh. Neural
      error mitigation of near-term quantum simulations. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(7):618–624, 2022.
 [3]  Yan-Jun Xie, Han-Ning Dai, Zhen-Sheng Yuan, Youjin Deng, Xiaopeng Li, Yu-Ao Chen, and Jian-Wei Pan.
      Bayesian learning for optimal control of quantum many-body states in optical lattices.   Physical Review A,
      106(1):013316, 2022.
 [4]  Shi-Yao Hou, Ningping Cao, Sirui Lu, Yi Shen, Yiu-Tung Poon, and Bei Zeng. Determining system hamiltonian
      from eigenstate measurements without correlation functions. New Journal of Physics, 22(8):083088, 2020.
 [5]  Xiao-Liang Qi and Daniel Ranard. Determining a local hamiltonian from a single eigenstate. Quantum, 3:159,
      2019.
 [6]  Youle Wang.   Quantum algorithms for Hamiltonian learning problems.   University of Technology Sydney
      (Australia), 2022.
 [7]  Nathan Wiebe, Christopher Granade, Christopher Ferrie, and David Cory. Quantum hamiltonian learning using
      imperfect quantum resources. Physical Review A, 89(4):042314, 2014.
 [8]  Valentin Gebhart,  Raffaele Santagati,  Antonio Andrea Gentile,  Erik M Gauger,  David Craig,  Natalia Ares,
      Leonardo Banchi, Florian Marquardt, Luca Pezzè, and Cristian Bonato.  Learning quantum systems.  Nature
      Reviews Physics, 5(3):141–156, 2023.
 [9]  Jinjing Shi, Wenxuan Wang, Xiaoping Lou, Shichao Zhang, and Xuelong Li. Parameterized hamiltonian learning
      with quantum circuit. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(5):6086–6095, 2022.
[10]  Andi  Gu,  Lukasz  Cincio,  and  Patrick  J  Coles.   Practical  black  box  hamiltonian  learning.   arXiv  preprint
      arXiv:2206.15464, 2022.
[11]  Frederik Wilde, Augustine Kshetrimayum, Ingo Roth, Dominik Hangleiter, Ryan Sweke, and Jens Eisert. Scalably
      learning quantum many-body hamiltonians from dynamical data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14328, 2022.
[12]  Alicja Dutkiewicz, Thomas E O’Brien, and Thomas Schuster. The advantage of quantum control in many-body
      hamiltonian learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07172, 2023.
[13]  Eyal Bairey, Itai Arad, and Netanel H Lindner. Learning a local hamiltonian from local measurements. Physical
      review letters, 122(2):020504, 2019.
[14]  Anurag Anshu, Srinivasan Arunachalam, Tomotaka Kuwahara, and Mehdi Soleimanifar. Sample-efficient learning
      of interacting quantum systems. Nature Physics, 17(8):931–935, 2021.
[15]  Jeongwan Haah, Robin Kothari, and Ewin Tang. Optimal learning of quantum hamiltonians from high-temperature
      gibbs states. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 135–146.
      IEEE, 2022.
[16]  Eyal Bairey, Chu Guo, Dario Poletti, Netanel H Lindner, and Itai Arad. Learning the dynamics of open quantum
      systems from their steady states. New Journal of Physics, 22(3):032001, 2020.
[17]  Hsin-Yuan Huang, Sitan Chen, and John Preskill. Learning to predict arbitrary quantum processes. PRX Quantum,
      4(4):040337, 2023.
[18]  Hsin-Yuan Huang, Yu Tong, Di Fang, and Yuan Su. Learning many-body hamiltonians with heisenberg-limited
      scaling. Physical Review Letters, 130(20):200403, 2023.


                                                                   15
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


[19]  Jun Zhang and Mohan Sarovar.  Quantum hamiltonian identification from measurement time traces.  Physical
      review letters, 113(8):080401, 2014.
[20]  Agnes Valenti, Evert van Nieuwenburg, Sebastian Huber, and Eliska Greplova. Hamiltonian learning for quantum
      error correction. Physical Review Research, 1(3):033092, 2019.
[21]  Matthew DeCross, Reza Haghshenas, Minzhao Liu, Yuri Alexeev, Charles H Baldwin, John P Bartolotta, Matthew
      Bohn, Eli Chertkov, Jonhas Colina, Davide DelVento, et al. The computational power of random quantum circuits
      in arbitrary geometries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02501, 2024.
[22]  M Morgado and S Whitlock. Quantum simulation and computing with rydberg-interacting qubits. AVS Quantum
      Science, 3(2), 2021.
[23]Martin Kliesch and Ingo Roth. Theory of quantum system certification.        PRX quantum, 2(1):010201, 2021.
[24]  Maria Schuld and Francesco Petruccione.  Machine learning with quantum computers, volume 676.  Springer,
      2021.
[25]  Giuseppe Carleo, Ignacio Cirac, Kyle Cranmer, Laurent Daudet, Maria Schuld, Naftali Tishby, Leslie Vogt-
      Maranto, and Lenka Zdeborová.   Machine learning and the physical sciences.   Reviews of Modern Physics,
      91(4):045002, 2019.
[26]  Anna Dawid, Julian Arnold, Borja Requena, Alexander Gresch, Marcin Płodzie´n, Kaelan Donatella, Kim A
      Nicoli, Paolo Stornati, Rouven Koch, Miriam Büttner, et al. Modern applications of machine learning in quantum
      sciences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04198, 2022.
[27]Florian Marquardt. Machine learning and quantum devices.        SciPost Physics Lecture Notes, page 029, 2021.
[28]  Ilia Khait, Juan Carrasquilla, and Dvira Segal.  Optimal control of quantum thermal machines using machine
      learning. Physical Review Research, 4(1):L012029, 2022.
[29]  Giacomo Torlai, Guglielmo Mazzola, Juan Carrasquilla, Matthias Troyer, Roger Melko, and Giuseppe Carleo.
      Neural-network quantum state tomography. Nature physics, 14(5):447–450, 2018.
[30]  Federico Becca and Sandro Sorella.  Quantum Monte Carlo approaches for correlated systems.  Cambridge
      University Press, 2017.
[31]  Xiao-Yu Dong, Frank Pollmann, and Xue-Feng Zhang. Machine learning of quantum phase transitions. Physical
      Review B, 99(12):121104, 2019.
[32]  Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks.
      Science, 355(6325):602–606, 2017.
[33]  Michael J Hartmann and Giuseppe Carleo. Neural-network approach to dissipative quantum many-body dynamics.
      Physical review letters, 122(25):250502, 2019.
[34]  Maxim Secor, Alexander V Soudackov, and Sharon Hammes-Schiffer. Artificial neural networks as propagators
      in quantum dynamics. The journal of physical chemistry letters, 12(43):10654–10662, 2021.
[35]  Arif Ullah and Pavlo O Dral. Speeding up quantum dissipative dynamics of open systems with kernel methods.
      New Journal of Physics, 23(11):113019, 2021.
[36]  Arif Ullah and Pavlo O Dral. Predicting the future of excitation energy transfer in light-harvesting complex with
      artificial intelligence-based quantum dynamics. Nature communications, 13(1):1930, 2022.
[37]  Nishant Nikhil and Brendan Tran Morris. Convolutional neural network for trajectory prediction. In Proceedings
      of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, pages 0–0, 2018.
[38]  Nathan Wiebe, Christopher Granade, Christopher Ferrie, and David G Cory. Hamiltonian learning and certification
      using quantum resources. Physical review letters, 112(19):190501, 2014.
[39]  Jianwei Wang, Stefano Paesani, Raffaele Santagati, Sebastian Knauer, Antonio A Gentile, Nathan Wiebe, Mau-
      rangelo Petruzzella, Jeremy L O’brien, John G Rarity, Anthony Laing, et al. Experimental quantum hamiltonian
      learning. Nature Physics, 13(6):551–555, 2017.
[40]  Han Zhang, Huawei Fan, Liang Wang, and Xingang Wang.   Learning hamiltonian dynamics with reservoir
      computing. Physical Review E, 104(2):024205, 2021.
[41]  Jing Zhou and DL Zhou. Recovery of a generic local hamiltonian from a degenerate steady state. Physics Letters
      A, 493:129279, 2024.
[42]  Liangyu Che, Chao Wei, Yulei Huang, Dafa Zhao, Shunzhong Xue, Xinfang Nie, Jun Li, Dawei Lu, and Tao Xin.
      Learning quantum hamiltonians from single-qubit measurements. Physical Review Research, 3(2):023246, 2021.


                                                                    16
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


[43]  Wenjun Yu, Jinzhao Sun, Zeyao Han, and Xiao Yuan. Robust and efficient hamiltonian learning. Quantum, 7:1045,
      2023.
[44]  Ayaka Usui, Anna Sanpera, and María García Díaz. Simplifying the simulation of local hamiltonian dynamics.
      Physical Review Research, 6(2):023243, 2024.
[45]  Dian Wu, Riccardo Rossi, Filippo Vicentini, Nikita Astrakhantsev, Federico Becca, Xiaodong Cao, Juan Car-
      rasquilla, Francesco Ferrari, Antoine Georges, Mohamed Hibat-Allah, et al. Variational benchmarks for quantum
      many-body problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04919, 2023.
[46]Daniel Ranard.        Aspects of Locality in Quantum Many-Body Physics. Stanford University, 2021.
[47]  Julia Kempe, Alexei Kitaev, and Oded Regev. The complexity of the local hamiltonian problem. In FSTTCS 2004:
      Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science: 24th International Conference, Chennai,
      India, December 16-18, 2004. Proceedings 24, pages 372–383. Springer, 2005.
[48]  Christopher E Granade, Christopher Ferrie, Nathan Wiebe, and David G Cory. Robust online hamiltonian learning.
      New Journal of Physics, 14(10):103013, 2012.
[49]  Masoud Mohseni, Ali T Rezakhani, and Daniel A Lidar.  Quantum-process tomography: Resource analysis of
      different strategies. Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, 77(3):032322, 2008.
[50]  Anurag Anshu and Srinivasan Arunachalam.  A survey on the complexity of learning quantum states.  Nature
      Reviews Physics, 6(1):59–69, 2024.
[51]  Giacomo Torlai, Christopher J Wood, Atithi Acharya, Giuseppe Carleo, Juan Carrasquilla, and Leandro Aolita.
      Quantum  process  tomography  with  unsupervised  learning  and  tensor  networks.   Nature  Communications,
      14(1):2858, 2023.
[52]  Marcel Neugebauer, Laurin Fischer, Alexander Jäger, Stefanie Czischek, Selim Jochim, Matthias Weidemüller,
      and Martin Gärttner. Neural-network quantum state tomography in a two-qubit experiment. Physical Review A,
      102(4):042604, 2020.
[53]  M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for
      solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational
      Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
[54]  Siddhartha Mishra and Roberto Molinaro.  Estimates on the generalization error of physics informed neural
      networks (pinns) for approximating a class of inverse problems for pdes, 2023.
[55]  Daniel Bertschinger, Christoph Hertrich, Paul Jungeblut, Tillmann Miltzow, and Simon Weber.  Training fully
      connected neural networks is complete on the reals.  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
      2024.
[56]  Dennis Elbrächter, Dmytro Perekrestenko, Philipp Grohs, and Helmut Bölcskei. Deep neural network approxima-
      tion theory. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(5):2581–2623, 2021.
[57]  Ricky TQ Chen,  Yulia Rubanova,  Jesse Bettencourt,  and David K Duvenaud.   Neural ordinary differential
      equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
[58]Patrick Kidger. On neural differential equations.        arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02435, 2022.
[59]  Balázs Csanád Csáji et al.   Approximation with artificial neural networks.  Faculty of Sciences, Etvs Lornd
      University, Hungary, 24(48):7, 2001.
[60]  Yulong Lu and Jianfeng Lu. A universal approximation theorem of deep neural networks for expressing probability
      distributions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:3094–3105, 2020.
[61]  Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
      2014.
[62]  John Charles Butcher and Gerhard Wanner.  Runge-kutta methods: some historical notes.  Applied Numerical
      Mathematics, 22(1-3):113–151, 1996.
[63]  Federico Girosi, Michael Jones, and Tomaso Poggio. Regularization theory and neural networks architectures.
      Neural computation, 7(2):219–269, 1995.
[64]  Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of
      the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pages 41–48, 2009.
[65]  Petru Soviany, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Paolo Rota, and Nicu Sebe. Curriculum learning: A survey. International
      Journal of Computer Vision, 130(6):1526–1565, 2022.


                                                                    17
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


[66]  Daniel Stilck Franca, Liubov A Markovich, VV Dobrovitski, Albert H Werner, and Johannes Borregaard. Efficient
      and robust estimation of many-qubit hamiltonians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09567, 2022.
[67]  Wen Wei Ho and Ðor ¯de Radiˇcevi´c.  The ergodicity landscape of quantum theories.  International Journal of
      Modern Physics A, 33(04):1830004, 2018.
[68]  Tomaž Prosen. General relation between quantum ergodicity and fidelity of quantum dynamics. Physical Review
      E, 65(3):036208, 2002.
[69]  Maksym Serbyn, Dmitry A Abanin, and Zlatko Papi´c. Quantum many-body scars and weak breaking of ergodicity.
      Nature Physics, 17(6):675–685, 2021.
[70]  Yingjian Liu, Piotr Sierant, Paolo Stornati, Maciej Lewenstein, and Marcin Płodzie´n. Quantum algorithms for
      inverse participation ratio estimation in multi-qubit and multi-qudit systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03338,
      2024.
[71]Hal Tasaki.        Physics and mathematics of quantum many-body systems, volume 66. Springer, 2020.
[72]David J Thouless.        The quantum mechanics of many-body systems. Courier Corporation, 2014.
[73]  Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd, and Lorenzo Maccone. Quantum-enhanced measurements: beating the standard
      quantum limit. Science, 306(5700):1330–1336, 2004.
[74]  Guillermo  García-Pérez,  Matteo  AC  Rossi,  Boris  Sokolov,  Francesco  Tacchino,  Panagiotis  Kl  Barkoutsos,
      Guglielmo Mazzola, Ivano Tavernelli, and Sabrina Maniscalco. Learning to measure: Adaptive informationally
      complete generalized measurements for quantum algorithms. Prx quantum, 2(4):040342, 2021.
[75]  Hsin-Yuan Huang, Richard Kueng, and John Preskill. Predicting many properties of a quantum system from very
      few measurements. Nature Physics, 16(10):1050–1057, 2020.









































                                                                     18
Hamiltonian Learning with NODEs


5    Appendix: Extended curriculum for Hamiltonians with higher complexity

As mentioned in Sec. 2, a general HamiltonianHT∈PN  has 4N−1 coefficients which quickly becomes infeasible as
the number of spins grows. To render this problem tractable, we seek to work in a setting where the ground truth is
guaranteed to haveO(M)<N Pauli strings. However, withO(M) Pauli strings, the number of coefficients to tune is
stillNM . As such, procedures like those found in [11, 66, 10] will only considerM = 2, corresponding to quadratic
Hamiltonians, with a geometric locality constraint such as nearest neighbour coupling only.  With NODEs, we it is
possible to go toO(M > 2) Hamiltonians with a curriculum learning strategy as discussed in the main paper. Here, we
briefly describe a second curriculum that can be applied in case of convergence issues for Hamiltonians with higher
complexity. To that end, letθm denote the set of trainable parameters associated to anO(m<M) Hamiltonian. For
example, with

                              HA =X        cxjXjXj+1 +cyjYjYJ+1 +czjZjZj+1
                                        j
                                   +XdxkXkXk+1Xk+2 +dykYkYk+1Yk+2 +dzkZkZk+1Zk+2                                                      (22)

                                       k
                                 ,
we have θ2  =  (cxj,cyj,czj) and θ3  =  (dxk,dyk,dzk).  This prescription separates parameters to be trained in batches
according to the polynomial order of their accompanying Pauli string. Having separated different orders, we apply the
following curriculum:

Curriculum 2
        i Switch off all θm except the smallest order. i.e. for alln>mmin,θn = 0.
       iiApply   Curriculum 1 withθm and a NN via Fig.2c. ??.
      iiiFreeze  θm, and allowθm+1̸= 0
       iiApply   Curriculum 1 withθm+2 and a NN via Fig.2c. ??.
       ivRepeat steps [ii], [iii] until the desired polynomial order, θM  is reached.

The result of applying this curriculum is that the measurement outcomes become more sensitive to variation of sub-
components of the Hamiltonian, mitigating any possible issues that can arise with vanishing gradients. In the main text,
this curriculum was not applied as our test set of Hamiltonians was convergent using the simpler curriculum in Sec. 2.3.
However, we believe this more elaborate curriculum is worth mentioning here because future works in this direction
will need to apply it.


























                                                                    19