 Short-range order and hidden energy scale in geometrically
                                        frustrated magnets

                                 A.P.  Ramirez1  and  S.V.  Syzranov1


   1Physics  Department,  University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz,  California  95064,  USA

       In geometrically frustrated (GF) magnets, conventional long-range order is sup-
    pressed due to the presence of primitive triangular structural units, and the nature of

    the ensuing ground state remains elusive.  One class of candidate states, extensively

    sought in experiments and vigorously studied theoretically, is the quantum spin liquid
    (QSL), a magnetically-disordered state in which all spins participate in a quantum-

    coherent many-body state.  Randomly located impurities,  present in all materials,

    may prevent QSL formation and instead lead to the formation of a spin-glass state.
    In this article, we review available data on the specific heat, magnetic susceptibility,

    and neutron scattering in GF materials.  Such data show that a pure GF magnet

    possesses a characteristic “hidden energy scale” significantly exceeded by the other
    microscopic energy scales in the material. When cooled down to a temperature below

    the hidden energy scale, a GF material develops significant short-range order that

    dominates its properties and, in particular, dictates the spin-glass transition temper-
    ature for experimentally accessible impurity densities.  We review the manifestations

    of  short-range  order  in  the  commonly  observed  thermodynamics  quantities  in  GF

    materials, possible scenarios for the hidden energy scale, and related open questions.







                                                CONTENTS


I. Introduction                                                                                                                 3

       What exactly is a quantum spin liquid?                                                                 4

       Goal of this review                                                                                                 5

       Materials to be discussed                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                    2

    II. Characterization of GF magnetic materials                                                                 7

         A. Types of quenched disorder                                                                                    7

         B. Importance of spatial dimensionality                                                                      8

         C. Heisenberg vs.  Ising spins                                                                                      9


  III. Magnetic susceptibility                                                                                              11

         A. The Curie-Weiss law                                                                                             11

         B. Susceptibility and glass transitions                                                                       12

         C. Quasispins                                                                                                             13


  IV. Hidden energy scale and short-range order                                                                15

         A. Glass transition temperature vs.  amount of disorder                                           15

         B. Neutron data                                                                                                        17

         C. A scenario for the hidden energy scale                                                                 21

                   Entropy associated with the hidden energy scale                                             23

         D. Specific heat at the lowest temperatures                                                              24

               1. Temperature dependence:  a test case                                                               25

               2. Magnetic-field (in-)dependence of the specific heat                                          26


    V. Conclusions and further directions                                                                            27


  VI. Data Availability                                                                                                       30


 VII. Conflicts of Interest                                                                                                   30


VIII. Acknowledgements                                                                                                     30


         References                                                                                                                  31
                                                                                                                  3


                                          I.    INTRODUCTION


In most magnetic materials at low temperatures,  spins are arranged in a regular pattern,
i.e.   form  long-range  magnetic  order.   In  some  materials,  however,  it  may  be  impossible
to  simultaneously  minimize  all  magnetic  interactions  between  spins,  which  may  lead  to
competition between multiple magnetic states, and the material may possibly avoid long-
range order.

In 1973, Anderson proposed [1] that the ground state of the Heisenberg model with nearest-
neighbor antiferromagnetic (AF) interactions on a triangular lattice may lack magnetic order
and instead display liquid-like properties with strong quantum fluctuations.  Although this
proposal  turned  out  to  be  incorrect  (the  model  develops  the  so-called  120◦  order   [2–4]),
it initiated a series of theoretical studies [5–7] of “quantum spin liquids” (QSLs), magnetic
states that lack long-range order (LRO) at T  = 0 and, broadly speaking, exhibit liquid-like
properties due to strong quantum fluctuations.  The interest in QSLs has been driven by the
possibility of numerous fundamental phenomena predicted in them, such as novel topological
states, fractionalized excitations, and long-range entanglement, as well as the existence of
anyon excitations in some QSLs, which can be used for robust quantum computation.

QSLs  can  be  grouped  into  two  theoretical  categories  that  fit  the  broad  description.   The
first includes models of spins on bipartite, e.g.  honeycomb, lattices in which the interactions
are tuned to prevent LRO. Spins on such lattices would be ordered antiferromagnetically
if  the interactions were  AF and  short-ranged but  avoid  this  order due  to a  more compli-
cated structure of the interactions, exemplified by the Shastry-Sutherland [8] and Kitaev [9]
models.  Despite the existence of materials such as RuCl3, considered as their approximate
realizations [10, 11], these materials nevertheless undergo long-range order in zero magnetic
field [12–15] instead of displaying clear signs of a QSL. While interesting behavior suggestive
of a QSL has recently been reported in RuCl3 in sufficiently strong magnetic fields [16–18],
the interpretation of the respective results as evidence for a QSL is under dispute (see, e.g.,
Refs. [19–21]).

A second class of systems, the so-called geometrically frustrated (GF) magnets, consists of
materials in which the smallest structural unit in the magnetic sublattice is a triangle [22–
24].  Such triangles make it impossible to minimize simultaneously all nearest-neighbor AF
                                                                                                                  4

interactions between spins.  This class includes large mineral families such as the spinels,
pyrochlores,  magnetoplumbites,  jarosites,  and  delafossites  [25].   These  materials  show  a
suppression of LRO to temperatures far below the characteristic scales of AF interactions
obtained  from  high-temperature  measurements.   In  the  absence  of  LRO,  strong  quantum
fluctuations in such materials are predicted to yield QSL states with fascinating fundamen-
tal  properties,  such  as  many-body  entanglement  and  topological  excitations  [5–7,  26–28].
Theoretical  interest  in  such  states  has  been  mirrored  by  experimental  searches  that  have
produced a large number of magnets with triangular primitive units and greatly suppressed
LRO transitions [24].




                               What exactly is a quantum spin liquid?


The term “spin liquid” commonly refers to a T  = 0 state of a magnetic material that lacks
LRO. The term “quantum spin liquid” is used to label a quantum-coherent state in which,
in addition to the lack of LRO, the quantum nature of spins gives rise to qualitatively new
properties.  Despite some commonalities among the different QSL models, in our view, there
is  not  a  universal,  commonly  accepted  definition  of  a  QSL.  Often,  in  theoretical  work,  a
spin  liquid  is  referred  to  as  a  QSL  if  it  displays  long-range  entanglement  or  topological
properties,  such  as  topological  order  or  fractionalized  excitations,  or  can  be  described  in
terms of emergent gauge fields.

The ambiguity surrounding the theoretical description of QSLs is mirrored experimentally,
where there is no consensus that QSLs have been conclusively identified in specific materials.
The experimental assignment of the QSL label to a particular material has relied on such
features as the absence of a transition to LRO or the form of the inelastic structure factor
measured by neutron scattering.  These features, however, are not unique to QSLs and allow
for other explanations.  For example, LRO can be suppressed by many other experimental
factors, e.g., dimerization [29], quenched disorder [30], low effective dimensionality [31], or
combinations of these.

Numerous excellent reviews dedicated to QSLs have been written over the last decade (see,
e.g., Refs.   [5–7, 26–28]).  We refer the readers to these reviews for a detailed discussion of
possible definitions of QSLs. In this article, we focus rather on the properties of GF materials,
                                                                                                                   5

the largest class of systems in which QSLs are sought, and especially those properties that are
common across classes of GF materials and thus reveal the fundamental physics of magnetic
states in GF systems and their properties observable in experiment.




                                             Goal of this review


The  aim  of  this  review  is  to  outline  a  minimal  set  of  existing  facts  that  apply  to  all  GF
magnets in the hope of informing future theoretical work.  Thus, we will restrict discussion
to the most common experimental quantities, because such data allow for intercomparison
among  all  GF  materials.   While  GF  magnets  have  been  experimentally  probed  in  many
different ways, the most common quantities are the magnetic susceptibility [χ(T )], specific
heat [C(T )], and the intensity of neutron scattering.

Other probes include NMR and µSR. We will not consider these here because, in our view,
each has a significant level of interpretive uncertainty.  Each one gives good information on
the internal field at the probe site, but the identity of the site is either unknown in the case
of µSR [32–34] or not well defined, as shown by the two distinct signals in NiGa2S4, which
were interpreted as evidence of stacking faults [32].

It is useful to remember what χ(T ), C(T ), and neutron scattering reveal about the state of
a magnetic material.  The susceptibility, χ(T ), is a long wavelength probe that is especially
useful  at  high  temperatures  for  determining  the  spin-spin  interaction  strength  via  Curie-
Weiss  analysis  and  at  low  temperatures  for  detecting  transitions,  e.g.,  to  an  LRO  or  a
spin-glass state.  Most importantly for this work, χ(T ) can detect non-magnetic (singlet)
excitations  only  weakly.   The  specific  heat,  however,  is  sensitive  to  all  excitations  with  a
spin origin, including non-magnetic excitations, but also to those not spin-derived, such as
phonons and charged excitations.  A powerful aspect of theC(T ) probe is its ability to count
degrees  of  freedom,  provided  the  non-spin-derived  excitations  are  accurately  determined.
Neutrons, likeχ(T ), can probe magnetic and structural excitations and can access them over
a large range of wavelengths, from mesoscopic distances down to interatomic length scales.
The complementarity of these three probes is sufficient to demonstrate key universal features
of GF magnets.  As we argue, among those universal features is the short-range magnetic
order  (SRO)  that forms  below a  certain characteristic  temperature,  which  is significantly
                                                                                                                 6

exceeded by the spin-spin interaction energy.



                                        Materials to be discussed


The strength of geometrical frustration in a material is characterized by the ratio

                                                  f =θW/Tc,                                                       (1.1)

known  as  the  “f-ratio”  and  introduced  by  one  of  us  in  Ref.  [24],  where θW  is  the  Weiss
constant, the energy scale that characterizes the strength of spin interactions in a material,
and Tc is the temperature below which the magnetic fluctuations are frozen.

Non-GF 3D materials undergo magnetic-ordering phase transitions at temperaturesTc∼θW ,
and thus have f-ratios of order unity.  By contrast,  strongly GF materials avoid ordering
down to very low temperatures, resulting in Tc≪θW  and large f-ratios f≫ 1.

In systems that undergo spin-glass and magnetic ordering transitions, the temperature Tc
corresponds to the critical temperature of the respective transition.  The definition, however,
can be extended to the case of the freezing of the magnetic degrees of freedom that is not
accompanied by any phase transition, as discussed in Ref. [35].

In this review, we will focus on materials with strong geometrical frustration, corresponding
to f ≳ 10, that have also been subject to magnetic vacancy studies and a full complement
of the simple experimental probes mentioned above.  We show that a select group of such
materials develops SRO at intermediate (T∼|θW|/10) temperatures.  We then argue that
this SRO is a universal feature of all GF systems and is key to understanding ground states
and their elementary excitations.

Due  to  the  above  restrictions,  many  GF  systems  will  not  be  extensively  analyzed.   Most
evident  among  the  omissions  is  the  family  of  paratacamite  compounds  related  to  well-
known  Herbersmithite  [γ−ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2]  [36],  which  consists  of  a  kagome  lattice  of
Cu2+  spins.   Herbertsmithite,  and  its  relatives  volborthite  [Cu3V2O7(OH)2· 2H2O]  [37–
39],  vesignieite  [BaCu3V2O8(OH)2]  [40],  kapellasite  [Cu3Zn(OH)6Cl2]  [40,  41],  haydeeite
[α−Cu3Mg(OH)6Cl2]  [42],  and  barlowite  [Cu4(OH)6FBr]  [43,  44]  all  have Cu2+  on  a
kagome lattice and exhibit a variety of ground states including FM and AF order.  They
all  possess  hydrogen,  which  is  deleterious  for  neutron  scattering,  though  some  have  been
                                                                                                               7

studied in their deuterated form, most importantly Herbertsmithite [36], and we will show
these data below.  Also,  for these materials,  we are unaware of systematic studies of spin
vacancies, a technique that has yielded great insight into the ground state.

A  second,  large  group  of  materials  that  eludes  the  present  review  is  4f  electron  systems,
the frustration in which has been intensively studied especially in recent years [26].  Since
4f atoms in an ionically bonded solid have exchange coupling strengths at least an order of
magnitude less than 3d systems, the θW  values are usually in the range of a few Kelvins or
less and, thus, the interaction can be strongly influenced by dipole-dipole (long range) forces
which are rarely considered for d-row transition ions.  Most importantly, however, geomet-
rical frustration addresses the physics at energy scales two or more orders of magnitude less
than the mean field temperature, θW .  Thus, for θW  values less than 1 K, measurements of
C(T ) and χ(T ) are needed down to 10mK,  which presents a barrier for characterization.
Firstly, obtaining C(T ) even down to 50mK often requires great care to maximize thermal
coupling to the sample.  Secondly, commercial magnetometers only reach 300mK.  Thus, ob-
taining susceptibility data down to the required temperatures is considerably more difficult
than for systems with larger θW  values.  Finally, the splitting of the total angular momen-
tum multiplet often leads to high-mJ doublets and, while this poses no fundamental barrier
to collective behavior,  higher-lying multiplets often obscure the determination of effective
moment from data taken above 2K.  Thus, in our view, the existing body of experimental
work on 4f materials precludes the systematic intercomparison of both high and low energy
scales as can be done for 3d systems.




            II.    CHARACTERIZATION OF GF MAGNETIC MATERIALS


                                   A.    Types of quenched disorder


In order to describe GF materials in the pure limit, one should understand their response
to  quenched  disorder.   One  may  distinguish  here  between  two  generic  types  of  disorder:
intrinsic and extrinsic.

Intrinsic disorder occurs without introducing quenched randomness in the synthesis process.
For example, inY2Mo2O7, Jahn-Teller distortions of theMo octahedra result in randomness
                                                                                                                  8

in the spin-spin interaction and a spin-glass (SG) transition at Tg = 22K  [45, 46].  In some
materials, different ions have to randomly occupy the same crystallographic site to ensure
charge balance between cations and anions.  For example, in Fe2TiO5, the Fe3+ and Ti4+
ions are randomly located on both A and B sites of the pseudo-Brookite structure [47].  In
NaCdCo2F7, theA site can be occupied by both Na1+ andCd2+ [48].  Another example of
such disorder comes from the inverse spinels, such asB(AB)O4, in which site mixing occurs
between the A2+ and B3+ ions [49].

Extrinsic  disorder  refers  to  foreign  atoms  introduced  in  the  clean  material.   Often,  such
disorder is represented by vacancies,  i.e.  foreign non-magnetic atoms substituting for the
magnetic atoms of the clean material.  Of course,  non-magnetic vacancies will be at least
subtly different in atomic size and, therefore, will not bond with their neighboring cations
in a manner identical to the magnetic ion, hence one expects small steric distortion around
the vacancies.  Extrinsic disorder may also be introduced by substitution on either a non-
magnetic cation site or the anion site, which can lead to charge disorder or sterically induced
randomness in the exchange interactions between magnetic ions [50].

Techniques  for  measuring  disorder  at  the  required  precision  are  few.   In  most  cases,  pu-
rity control consists of identifying the presence or absence of unexpected diffraction peaks
in X-ray diffraction (XRD). Such a technique, however, cannot detect impurities or disor-
der other than by the observations of foreign crystallographic phases or broadening of the
diffraction  peaks.   In  the  case  of Y2Mo2O7,  pair  distribution  function  analysis  of  neutron
and X-ray scattering was needed to determine the distribution of bond lengths responsible
for interaction disorder and the observed spin glass behavior [46, 51].  For deviations from
the stoichiometry larger than a few percent, energy-dispersive X-ray absorption can reveal
impurity atoms, but its precision is limited.




                             B.    Importance of spatial dimensionality


The role of spatial dimensionality is well-understood for non-frustrated systems exhibiting
LRO  and  is  manifested  both  in  the  critical  behavior  as  well  as  the  ground  state  and  its
elementary excitations [31].  Effective dimensionality less than three can arise either from
a  crystal  structure  that  is  lamellar  (2D)  or  fibrous  (1D),  or  may  result  from  a  collective
                                                                                                                  9

structural distortion such as a cooperative Jahn-Teller effect that modulates the spin-spin
interaction in a uniform manner [52].

The  role  of  spatial  dimensionality  is  less  well-understood  for  SGs.   Great  effort  has  been
devoted to the question of whether or not a 2D system can transition to an SG state, and
the  present  consensus,  based  on  computational  work,  is  that  spin  glass  freezing  anoma-
lies  are  only  observable  in  3D  systems  [53].    While  certain  layered  materials  such  as
Rb2(Cu,Co)F4  [54], have been shown to exhibit SG behavior, such materials can be clas-
sified only as “quasi-2D”, i.e.  while the intra-plane interactions are small compared to the
inter-plane ones, the 3D nature of the intra-plane correlations is essential for the emergence
of the SG phase.

While  the  consensus  view  is  that  purely  2D  systems  do  not  evince  an  SG  transition,  it
is possible that the SG-transition temperature is actually strongly suppressed in quasi-2D
materials, owing to their effective 2D nature at short scales.  Numerous authors seeking to
establish the existence of 2D QSLs in layered materials argued that the absence of an SG
cusp in χ(T ) for experimentally accessed temperatures rules out an SG state, which is seen
as inimical to a QSL (see, for example, Refs. [36, 55–57]).  The SG transition in such layered
systems, however, may take place at temperatures below the observed range.



                                    C.    Heisenberg vs.  Ising spins


This review focuses on strongly GF systems with Heisenberg spins.  Ising spins on frustrat-
ing lattices present a different and informative complement to Heisenberg spins.  In early
theoretical work, Wannier considered 2D Ising spins on a triangular lattice and showed that,
whereas  ferromagnetic  spin-spin  interactions  lead  to  LRO,  antiferromagnetic  interactions
cause a total suppression of the transition and lead to a nonzero ground-state entropy (per
spin) [22].  The existence of such non-vanishing ground-state entropy for theoretical Ising
models makes them ”infinitely frustrated”, a situation reflected experimentally by the lack
of  Ising-based  magnets  for  which  the  f -ratio  can  be  defined  by  a  measurable  low-energy
scale.  Among the materials that have Ising spins but do not exhibit an ice-like state are
Co3Mg(OH)6Cl2 [58] and A2Co(SeO3)2, where A =K or Rb [59].

A possible reason behind the lack of experimental Ising GF magnets is related to the stringent
                                                                                                                 10

conditions required to create local degeneracy.  Ising spins occur due to, e.g., a distortion in
the crystal field environment or due to spin-orbit coupling, i.e.  a local structural anisotropy.
Such  anisotropy  can  lead  to  anisotropy  in  the  spin-spin  interaction  and  the  subsequent
selection of certain favored LRO states, thus destroying frustration.  While the paucity of
GF Ising systems is unfortunate from the perspective of comparing theory and experiment,
their  role  in  the  development  of  quantum  materials  would  be  limited  anyway  due  to  the
Ising single-ion potential well constraint at very low temperatures.  (Transverse-field Ising
materials are possible but present the additional requirement of a unique transverse field
direction, which is more difficult to realize with a triangular motif.)

With the above caveat in hand, a special class of 3D Ising systems was pioneered by Harris,
Bramwell  et  al.,  who  described  a  formal  correspondence  between  water  ice  and  a  class
of  Ising  magnets  which  they  called  “spin  ice”  [60].   The  correspondence  is,  specifically,
between two possible hydrogen atom positions around each oxygen in water ice and the two
states  of  an  Ising  spin.   The  spin-ice  materials  class  consists  of  Ising  ions,  such  as Ho3+
or Dy3+,  occupying the A-site of the pyrochlore lattice,  a sublattice consisting of corner-
shared tetrahedra.  Ramirez et al.  measured [61] the specific heat of the spin ice candidate,
Dy2Ti2O7, and showed that the ground-state entropy of the Dy3+ ions is close to Pauling’s
estimate (R/2) ln(3/2)≈ 0.29R ln(2).

While it may seem as though the spin-ice state results purely from the frustration of interac-
tions, several factors set spin ice apart from the Heisenberg GF systems, which are the focus
of this review.  First, Dy2Ti2O7 is not strongly GF because θW  = 0.5K, which is the same
temperature region where the spin ice SRO sets in, thus f≈ 1.  Second, when disordered,
Dy2Ti2O7 fails to exhibit an SG state [62].  Third, because of the small spin-spin exchange
interactions,  long-range  dipole-dipole  interactions  play  an  important  role  in  determining
the ground state energy [63].  It is interesting to consider why Dy2Ti2O7  doesn’t undergo
LRO similar to other Ising systems on triangle-based lattices.  This is most likely due to
the non-collinear nature of the crystal field distortion of the rare-earth environment.  The
Ising axis for each ligand environment surrounding theDy3+ ions connects the vertex of the
tetrahedron to its center.  Thus, with four distinct crystalline directions, the distortion itself
is sterically frustrated,  which may help to explain the relatively small number of spin-ice
materials.
                                                                                                                11

Unlike Ising systems, no evidence has been found for missing entropy, i.e.  extensive entropy
of the ground states, in the Heisenberg spin systems.  While missing entropy, suggestive of
spin-liquid behavior, has been reported for CuAl2O4  [64] and CuGa2O4  [65], where Cu2+
occupies the A-site of the spinel lattice, the conclusion about the missing entropy was reached
based on the specific-heat extending only up to 20K or 30K, respectively.  At the same time,
the inverse susceptibilityχ−1(T ) in these materials deviates from linearity at a much higher
temperature, implying that the remaining entropy will be found at higher temperatures.





                               III.    MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY


                                        A.    The Curie-Weiss law


The dependence of the inverse magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) on temperature T  for several
GF materials [36, 66–73] with large f-ratios f > 10 is shown in Fig. 1.  At sufficiently high
temperatures, GF materials exhibit the Curie-Weiss behaviour of the susceptibility


                                              1/χ(T )∝T +θW,                                                  (3.1)


where θW >  0  is  the  Weiss  constant.   This  behavior  is  identical  to  the  high-temperature
behavior of susceptibility in non-GF antiferromagnetic materials.  There is, however, a key
difference between the Curie-Weiss laws in non-GF and GF systems.  In a non-GF system, it
persists only down to the critical temperatureTc∼θW , at which the spins order in a regular
pattern,  and  the  susceptibility  exhibits  a  singularity.   By  constrast,  in  GF  systems,  the
dependence 3.1 of the magnetic susceptibility on temperature extends down to significantly
lower temperatures T≪θW .

The  value  of θW  obtained  from  the  temperature  dependence  (3.1)  can  be  used  to  obtain
the f-ratio  [cf.   Eq.  1.1],  which  characterizes  the  degree  of  frustration.   Because  the  de-
pendence (3.1) implies that a material behaves effectively as free spins in the limit of high
temperatures T≫ θW , the respective value of θW  is faithful only if the measured slope of
1/χ(T ) matches the expected Hund’s rule moment.
                                                                                                                  12































FIG.  1.   The  dependence  of  the  inverse  susceptibility χ−1(T )  on  the  temperature T  for  several
GF materials [36, 66–73].  The susceptibility and the temperature are shown, respectively, in units

of C/θW  and θW ,  where C  and θW  are  the  Curie  and  Weiss  constants.   The  upper  and  lower

insets, represented by the boxes in the main frame, show, respectively, the spin-glass transitions in
NiGa2S4  and Na4Ir3O8  and SrCr8.8Ga3.2O19.  The dashed line corresponds to the Curie-Weiss

law.



                               B.    Susceptibility and glass transitions


While the linear, high-temperature behavior of the inverse susceptibility is a universal feature
of GF systems, there is a dichotomy in the low-temperature behavior between GF systems
that eventually undergo LRO to an AF state and those that resist ordering.

At temperatures above magnetic and glass transitions, this dichotomy usually manifests in
the sign of the deviation of the magnetic susceptibility from the Curie-Weiss law.  When the
system undergoes an AF transition, the high-temperature χ(T )−1  typically bends upward
on cooling (see Fig. 1), reflecting the appearance of AF correlations.  However, if the system
                                                                                                               13

undergoes  an  SG  glass  transition  instead  of  developing  magnetic  order, χ(T )−1  typically
bends downwards on cooling above the transition, a behavior that in conventional magnetic
systems is referred to as a Curie tail  and similar to that coming from free spins.

Such Curie tails can be explained by the presence of dilute vacancy defects.  As discussed
in detail in Sec. III C below, a vacancy defect in a GF material is equivalent to an effective
spin, a “quasispin”, in terms of its magnetic susceptibility.  At sufficiently high temperatures,
magnetic correlations in the system are short-ranged, and the quasispins of vacancy defects
can be considered non-interacting and independent of each other.  Such quasispins act as
effective  free  spins  and  give  rise  to the  Curie  tail.   At  lower  temperatures,  the  quasispin-
quasispin interactions become essential (see Sec. III C for a detailed discussion).

At the lowest temperatures, SG transitions are observed (see the insets in Fig. 1) even in
rather pure materials, such as the triangular lattice compound NiGa2S4 [74] and the spinel
ZnCr2O4  [67].   In ZnCr2O4,  SG  freezing  is  even  observed  deep  in  the  AF  temperature
regime, demonstrating that an SG state can coexist with LRO.

The novelty of SGs occurring in nearly pure GF materials was realized early in the develop-
ment of GF magnetism [24, 45] and suggests an analogy with conventional SGs in metallic
materials in which spins have densities less than 1%, far below the nearest-neighbor perco-
lation threshold.  Such materials undergo SG freezing due to the long-range nature of the
RKKY interaction [75].  The analogy falters, however, in the following manner.  While the
RKKY interaction in conventional SGs exists above the glass temperature, Tg, there is no
evidence for such an interaction for GF SGs above Tg.  In addition, the medium in which
the GF SG state forms is comprised of a dense population of spins, whereas conventional
metallic SGs have no magnetic sources in the spatial region between the spins.  Thus, the
physical difference between the two classes of SGs is profound [24],  despite similarities in
their collective, bulk behavior [76, 77].



                                               C.    Quasispins


Vacancy  defects,  the  most  common  type  of  quenched  disorder  in  GF  materials,  have  a
fundamental effect on magnetic susceptibility.  It has been found that, in terms of response
to a magnetic field,  vacancies act as effective free spins,  “quasispins”,  with the Curie-like
                                                                                                                 14

susceptibility [in units of (gµB)2/kB]

                                               χvac = NvacT ⟨ ˆS2z⟩,                                                   (3.2)

whereNvac is the density of the vacancy defects and  ˆSz is the projection of the quasispin to
the direction along which the susceptibility is measured.

The quasispin behavior (3.2) was first identified [78] in SrCr9pGa12−9pO19  (where Nvac∝
1−p) and attributed to “orphan spins”, i.e.  the spins of rareCr3+ ions that are disconnected
from the bulk of the spins by the vacancies.  The density of such “orphan spins” is rather
low and insufficient to account for the value of the Curie constant in the contribution (3.2)
to the susceptibility [67], yet the “orphan spin” contribution would scale non-linearly with
the defect density Nvac, in contradiction with the observed linear dependence [78].

A more realistic picture of the vacancy susceptibility is the quasispin picture, in which each
isolated vacancy is screened by the surrounding magnetic medium and behaves as a free spin.
Such behavior should be expected in a generic material based on the fluctuation-dissipation
relation χzz  =⟨ ˆM 2z⟩/T  if  the  magnetization   ˆMz  of  a  correlated  region  around  a  vacancy
commutes with the system’s Hamiltonian.

The  behavior  and  values  of  quasispins  of  vacancy  defects  have  been  a  subject  of  intense
research  in  a  variety  of  systems,  such  as  2D  Heisenberg  antiferromagnets  [79–83],  one-
dimensional spin chains and ladders [79, 84–90] and arrays of classical vector spins [91, 92].
It has been argued in Ref. [90] that the variance⟨ ˆS2z⟩ of the quasispin of a vacancy defect and
quasispin-quasispin interactions match the variance of the spins of the magnetic atom and
spin-spin interactions in the vacancy-free material, as long as the presence of the vacancy
does not change the short-range magnetic order around it and the magnetization along thez
axis is a good quantum number.  This has been confirmed [84] by exact calculations for a 1D
chain with nearest-neighbor and next-to-nearest-neighbor interactions, the minimal model
in which vacancies exhibit quasispin behavior.

Quasispins exhibit further intriguing phenomena close to quantum phase transitions.  It has
been demonstrated in Ref. [80] that in a material close to such a transition, the soft modes
of the fluctuating order parameter renormalize the value of a vacancy quasispin and lead
to an effective fractional quasispin.  A fractional quasispin has been reported in numerical
simulations in Ref. [93] for a bilayer antiferromagnetic system in which the quantum phase
                                                                                                               15

transition is driven by the value of the interlayer coupling.

The generic behavior of the magnetic susceptibility in a material with dilute vacancies can
be summarized by the equation

                             χzz(T ) =⟨ ˆS2z⟩NvacT       + N−b(T )NvacN    χbulk(T ),                             (3.3)

where N  is  the  density  of  magnetic  atoms  in  the  vacancy-free  material; χbulk(T )  is  the
susceptibility  of  the  vacancy-free  material; Nvac  is  the  vacancy  density,  and b(T )  is  the
effective “vacancy size” [84].  The first term in Eq. (3.3) describes the contribution of the
quasispins of vacancy defects, while the second term comes from the bulk spins diluted by
the vacancies; each vacancy reduces the effective number of bulk spins by the “vacancy size”
b(T ).

Equation (3.3) describes the susceptibility of a GF magnet in the limit of dilute vacancies,
in which the quasispins of isolated vacancies can be considered independently.  With increas-
ing the vacancy density Nvac/N,  the susceptibility  (3.3) receives non-linear corrections in
Nvac [90].



            IV.    HIDDEN ENERGY SCALE AND SHORT-RANGE ORDER


In this section, we review available data for the properties of the glass transitions, neutron-
scattering results, and thermodynamic properties of GF magnetic materials.  All such data
demonstrate the existence of the “hidden energy scale” in such materials, significantly ex-
ceeded by other microscopic energies, e.g. θW , in them.  When a material is cooled down
below such a scale, it develops significant short-range magnetic order.  This scale, albeit a
property of a disorder-free material, also determines the temperature of the glass transition
for realistic impurity concentrations.



                  A.    Glass transition temperature vs.  amount of disorder


In Ref. [94], the spin-glass transition temperature Tg has been analyzed as a function of the
density of vacancy defects in all frustrated materials for which the data on such transitions
are available.  Figure 2 summarizes the discovered trends.
                                                                                                                 16

Although the glass transition is disorder-driven, increasing the density of vacancies, which
contribute to the total disorder strength, lowers the glass transition temperature.  In other
words,  contrary  to  common  intuition  and  existing  models  (see,  e.g.   Refs.  [75,  95,  96]),
purifying  the  material  by  reducing  the  number  of  vacancies  makes  random  spin  freezing
more favorable.

In the limit of vanishing density concentration, the glass transition temperature extrapolates
to a scale of order T ∗∼ 10K, which we dubbed the “hidden energy scale”, in all analyzed
frustrated compounds [97].  This scale is significantly exceeded by the Weiss constant θW ,
which  characterizes  the  strength  of  spin-spin  interactions  and  is  typically  a  few  hundred
Kelvin [94].

Another universal trend displayed by all GF magnets is the increase of magnetic suscepti-
bilityχ(T ) with increasing the vacancy concentration, as shown in Figs. 3(b) and (d).  This
trend, as well as the decrease of the SG transition temperature with adding impurities to
a  material,  is  opposite  to  the  trends  observed  in  conventional  SGs  (i.e.   SGs  in  non-GF
materials)[75].

The dichotomy between between conventional SGs and those in GF materials comes from the
different nature of quenched randomness, degrees of freedom that undergo SG freezing, and
the clean medium.  Indeed, in conventional spin glasses, magnetic impurities are randomly
located  in  a  non-magnetic  medium,  and  the  SG  transition  consists  in  the  freezing  of  the
magnetic moments of those impurities.  With increasing the density of magnetic impurities,
the strength of interactions between them grows, and both the SG transition temperature
and the susceptibility grow, as shown in Fig. 3a for the compound EuxSr1−xS [98].

By contrast, in GF materials, the medium consists of magnetic atoms, while quenched dis-
order is dominated by randomly located vacancies, i.e.  non-magnetic atoms.  As discussed
in Sec. III C, each vacancy can be associated with a quasispin.  Because the quasispin con-
tribution  to  the  susceptibility χ(T )  is  more  singular  at  low  temperatures  than  the  bulk
susceptibility [cf.  Eq. (3.3)], it dominates the effect of changing the impurity concentration,
resulting in the increase of the susceptibility with vacancy density [99], dχ(T )/dNvac > 0.

While  quenched  disorder  is  necessary  for  SG  transitions,  we  argue  [35,  94]  that  the  tem-
perature of SG transitions in the analyzed GF compounds is determined by the properties
                                                                                                                 17

























FIG. 2.  Adapted with modification from Ref. [94].  The glass-transition temperature as a function
of  vacancy  density  for  GF  magnetic  materials.   Extrapolation  to  the  limit  of  vanishing  vacancy

densities reveals the hidden energy scale T ∗.


of the clean GF medium rather than the amount of quenched disorder for experimentally
achievable amounts.  As we clarify in what follows, the lowest-energy magnetic degrees of
freedom have a characteristic energy of the order of the hidden energy scale T ∗  described
above and are suppressed at lower temperatures.  In the presence of quenched disorder, this
usually leads to spin-glass freezing at a temperature of order T ∗ [94].

The hidden energyT ∗ being the property of the clean GF medium is consistent with its value
being of the same order of magnitude (10K) in a broad class of materials despite different
microscopic details and types of disorder.  Below, we present further evidence for a crossover
in the properties of the clean GF medium at temperaturesT∼T ∗ in the neutron scattering
intensity and discuss a microscopic scenario for the hidden energy scale.




                                             B.    Neutron data


As we describe in this subsection, the intensity of neutron scattering in GF materials confirms
the existence of the hidden energy scale and can provide further insights into its nature.
                                                                                                                   18




































FIG. 3.  Adapted with modification from Ref. [94].  The behavior of magnetic susceptibility χ(T )

and glass transition temperatures as a function of impurity density in conventional glasses [panels

(a) and (c)] and in geometrically frustrated materials [panels (b) and (d)].


Neutrons are an essential probe for understanding conventional antiferromagnets since they
scatter elastically from atomic spins and can detect staggered order, even though this order
produces  no  net  magnetic  moment.   In  the  ordered  state  of  a  magnet  possessing  LRO,
inelastic  neutron  scattering  can  also  measure  the  energy-wavevector  relationship  of  spin
waves and, by appropriate modeling, extract the spin-spin interaction strengths.

Because LRO is usually not seen in GF systems, information gleaned from elastic scattering
is confined to broad intensity versus wavevector peaks.  Such a diffuse scattering signal lies
underneath sharp Bragg peaks caused by scattering of neutrons from the ionic nuclei.  Most
generally, magnetic scattering can be related to the generalized susceptibility, as discussed
by  Bramwell  in  Ref.  [25].   In  particular,  the  anisotropy  in  this  susceptibility  can  reveal
                                                                                                               19

the  nature  of  SRO,  the  prime  example  being  the  so-called  “pinch  points”  in  the  diffuse
scattering in spin ice [100–102].  Pinch-point patterns of scattering result from the spin ice-
rule expressing the lowest energy state of the four spin directions on a tetrahedron, namely
two-in-two-out.  We believe that such an analysis of scattering intensities will be critically
important for understanding the ground state of GF systems, but the present discussion will
be concerned simply with the presence or absence of the SRO revealed by such data.

Broholm et al.  were first to show that a GF system, SrCr9pGa12−9pO19 (p = 0.79), exhibits
a broad SRO scattering signal.  They extracted a maximum spin-spin correlation length of
ξ = 7±2˚A from the width of the broad peak, and showed that the scattering intensity at the
corresponding wavelength increases rapidly on cooling through the hidden energy scale [103].
Similar data were obtained for a sample ofSrCr8.9Ga3.1O19 (p = 0.97,Tg = 3.68K) and are
shown in Figure 4a, along with the susceptibility on the same compound [104].  Thus, we
see that the atomic spins undergo short-range order at the hidden energy scale.  In addition,
it  is  reasonable  to  surmise  that  this  is  a  bulk  effect,  i.e.   the  fraction  of  such  spins  is  a
non-negligible fraction of the total atomic spin population and, as discussed above, exists
independent of the SG state.

How common is such a neutron signature of SRO in GF systems?  We argued previously
that the hidden energy scale was a generic feature of all GF magnets [94] and, fortunately,
neutron scattering has now been performed on a good handful of such f > 10 materials.
In Figure 4b-e, we show data for NiGa2S4 [74, 105], Y2Mo2O7 [45, 106], Fe2TiO5 [47] and
Herbertsmithite  [36]  similar  to  that  for SrCr9pGa12−9pO19  [104].   These  data  encompass
different spin values (S  = 1/2, 1, 3/2, 5/2), different lattice types (triangular, kagome, py-
rochlore, hyperkagome), as well as effective spatial dimensionalities 2 and 3.  We see that
the growth of intensity at short wavelength is a generic feature of these systems, and always
occurs in the vicinity of the SG transition, with the exception of Herbertsmithite, which has
been argued to be 2D to a very good approximation (in contrast to the other lamellar ma-
terials, such as SrCr9pGa12−9pO19 and NiGa2S4, in which the interlayer coupling are more
essential) and therefore will not exhibit SG freezing.  Similarly to the other materials, the
characteristic temperature T ∗∼ 5K at which Herbertsmithite exhibits SRO is significantly
smaller than the Weiss constant θW≈ 300K.
                                                                                                                        20



























































FIG. 4.  Neutron scattering intensity (black circles) [36, 47, 104–106] and magnetic susceptibility
(grey circles) [36, 45, 47, 74, 104] for various GF compounds as a function of temperature.
                                                                                                                 21

We note that for SG transitions in conventional, non-GF materials, neutron scattering also
shows  an  increase  in  diffuse  scattering  on  cooling  towards  the  glass  transition  tempera-
ture [75, 107].  In these systems, however, this magnetic scattering is caused by the degrees
of freedom that undergo SG freezing.  In GF systems, on the other hand, neutrons are scat-
tered by the background spins.  Neutron scattering cannot, of course, differentiate between
the two scenarios, but in GF systems, it clearly evidences the SRO established by the bulk
of the spins.



                            C.    A scenario for the hidden energy scale


The data summarized in Secs. IV A and IV B illustrate that the hidden energy scale is a
universal  property  of  GF  magnets  and  is  a  property  of  the  clean  system.   Recently,  we
proposed [35] a scenario of the hidden energy scale.

Essential to this scenario is the observation that the heat capacity C(T ) in GF frustrated
materials, in which data in a sufficiently large temperature range are available, display two
peaks in the behavior ofC(T ), as shown in Fig. 5.  This two-peak behavior is observed exper-
imentally in all materials for which the heat-capacity data are available in a sufficiently broad
temperature range, such as  3He atoms on graphite [108, 109],NiGa2S4 [72],NaYbO2 [110],
NaYbSe2 [111], Gd3Ga5O12 [112], as well as in abundant numerical simulations [113–129].

The temperature of the higher-energy peak is of the order of the Weiss constant θW , while
the low-temperature peak is located at significantly lower temperatures of the order of the
hidden energy scale T ∗.  An important insight into the nature of both peaks is provided by
the numerical simulations [121, 128][35] of a family of the XXZ  models described by the
Hamiltonian
                                  ˆH =JX         ˆSzi ˆSzj +α ˆSxi  ˆSxj  +α ˆSy
                                                                          i ˆSyj ,                                  (4.1)
                                           (ij)

with the anisotropy parameter α varying between 0 (the Ising-model case) and 1 (isotropic
Heisenberg model).  At smallα≪ 1, the states of the model are similar to those of the Ising  ˆSxi  ˆSxj  + ˆSy
model,  and  the  effect  of  the  transverse  couplings  [∝                       i ˆSyj ]  can  be  understood
perturbatively  in α.   With  increasing α  from  small  values  to  values  of  order  unity,  the
properties of the isotropic Heisenberg model can be connected to those near the Ising limit.
                                                                                                                22




























FIG. 5.    The C(T )/T  vs. T  dependence in NiGa2S4 obtained by digitizing the data reported in
Ref. [72].


In  Ref.  [121],  it  was  demonstrated  that  the XXZ  model  on  the  kagome  lattice  exhibits
the two-peak structure of the heat capacity for any nonzero transverse coupling [α > 0 in
Eq. (4.1)] but has only one peak in the Ising case (α = 0), suggesting that the transverse
coupling  is  essential  for  the  formation  of  the  lower-temperature  peak,  while  the  higher-
temperature peak is of the Ising origin.

The  ground  states  of  the  Ising  model  on  common  frustrating  lattices  have  extensive  de-
generacy (i.e.  degeneracy that scales exponentially with the system size).  Single spin-flip
excitations have energies of the orderθW∼ZJ, whereZ andJ are the coordination number
and the AF coupling constant, and give rise to one peak in the heat capacity C(T ).  In the
presence of a weak transverse coupling (0 < α≪ 1),  the degeneracy of the Ising ground
states is lifted, with the respective low-energy excitations resulting in the formation of the
lower-temperature peak [121, 128][35].  The characteristic energy of that peak is determined
by the Ising instantons, the minimum sequences of pair-wise spin-exchange processes that
connect similar Ising ground states to each other.

With increasing the transverse coupling, i.e.  the value of the parameter α, the energies of
                                                                                                                 23

the excitations that give rise to the lower peak of C(T ) increase.  However, the two peaks
remain separated even forα∼ 1 [128].  It has been estimated in Ref. [35] that the ratio of the
hidden energy scale, i.e.  the temperature of the first peak, to the characteristic temperature
θW  of the second peak has the order of magnitude

                                                 T ∗      α   Z1,                                                     (4.2)
                                                 θW ∼      Z


where Z  is the coordination number of the lattice and Z1 is the size of the minimum Ising
instanton, i.e.  the minimum number of pairwise spin-exchange processes that connect two
Ising ground states.  As these numbers vary in the ranges Z  = 4... 6 and Z1 = 1... 3 for
common frustrating lattices (triangular, kagome, pyrochlore, etc.), the ratio (4.2) remains
small even for α of order unity.  This smallness ensures separation of the two peaks of the
heat capacity C(T ) in frustrated magnets.

The estimate (4.2) also imposes a constraint on the generalizedf-ratio, the figure of merit of
frustration given by Eq. (1.1) in which the temperature Tc∼T ∗ is the characteristic energy
scale of the freezing of the magnetic degrees of freedom that is not necessarily accompanied
by a (magnetic-ordering or spin-glass) phase transition. However, in the presence of sufficient
quenched disorder in 3D, the freezing out of these degrees of freedom will lead to an SG
transition at a temperature T∼T ∗.

We note that while the two-peak feature is a universal property of GF magnets, only one
of  those  peaks  is  usually  observed  due  to  an  insufficient  temperature  range  accessed  in
the  measurements.   In  GF  materials  with  3d  elements,  the  higher-temperature  peak  lies
at temperatures θW ≳ 100K  and is rarely captured in experiments.  In GF materials with
significantly lowerθW , such as rare-earth compounds, the lower peak may lie below the lower
limit of cryogenic apparatus (∼ 50mK) and may thus be inaccessible in experiments.





                             Entropy associated with the hidden energy scale


Because  the  states  that  lead  to  the  formation  of  the  lower-temperature  peak  in  the  heat
capacity C(T )  are  continuously  connected  to  the  ground  states  of  the  Ising  model,  the
                                                                                                                 24

entropy

                                                    Z      C(T )
                                              S =    lower   T  dT                                                  (4.3)
                                                      peak

associated with the lower peak of C(T ) matches the respective Ising ground-state entropy
for a particular lattice type.  If the lower-temperature peak is well separated from the higher-
temperature one,  comparing the entropy under it with the Ising ground-state entropy on
the same lattice can be used, therefore, for verifying the described mechanism of the hidden
energy scale.

The  values  of  the  Ising  ground-state  entropy  are  known  for  common  2D  lattices,  such  as
triangular [22, 130, 131]) and kagome [132, 133] lattices, based on analytical arguments.  For
other lattices, e.g.  the pyrochlore lattice [61, 134], the value of the entropy can be found
numerically.  We note that magnetism in many GF systems comes from higher spins, such as
spins-1 or spins-3/2.  Strictly speaking, the entropy under the lower peak in these systems
has to be compared with the ground-state entropy of the respective higher-spin counterparts
of the Ising model.  Often, however, the ground-state entropy of such models will match the
ground-state entropy of the conventional Ising model, corresponding to classical spins-1/2.

A test case for the entropy associated with the hidden energy scale is provided byNiGa2S4,
a layered, effectively 2D material with a triangular lattice and the heat capacityC(T ) shown
in Fig. 5.  The value of the entropy (4.3) under the lower peak obtained from the digitized
data [72] shown in Fig. 5 is given byS≈ 0.35 per spin, which is indeed close to the value of
the Ising ground-state entropy SIsing≈ 0.32 on the triangular lattice [22, 130, 131]).





                           D.    Specific heat at the lowest temperatures


In the previous subsections, we described manifestations of the hidden energy scale in GF
magnets,  the  type  of  excitations  leading  to  that  scale,  and  the  total  associated  entropy.
In  this  subsection,  we  describe  the  temperature  and  magnetic-field  dependencies  of  the
heat capacity C(T ), which provide further insight into the lowest-energy excitations in GF
materials.
                                                                                                               25


                                 1.    Temperature dependence:  a test case


Understanding  the  heat  capacity C(T )  as  a  function  of  temperature  in  GF  systems  with
Heisenberg  spins  presents  challenges,  many  of  which  are  illustrated  in SrCr9pGa12−9pO19
(SCGO).  This  material,  containing  kagome  bilayers  of Cr3+ S  =  3/2  Heisenberg  spins,
exhibits an SG transition at Tg≈ 2.7− 4.2K  for 0.6 < p < 0.98 [76, 135].  Specific heat
measurements show the lower-temperature peak ofC(T )/T atT≈ 6K.  The area associated
with that peak is given by∼ 15% of the total R ln 4 entropy, per mole of Cr.

The family of the SCGO materials exhibits a universal trend: the quadratic behaviorC(T )∝
T 2 of the lowest-temperature (T≪T ∗) heat capacity, robust on varying the concentration
p of the magnetic Cr atoms.  This temperature dependence is inconsistent with the linear
heat capacity C(T )∝ T  generically expected to emerge in spin glasses due to tunnelling
between pairs of local energy minima separated by random potential barriers [136].

In a layered, i.e.  effectively 2D material, the observed behavior of heat capacity may come
from  any  linearly  dispersive  excitations.   We  note  that  such  excitations  in  SCGO  cannot
be  antiferromagnetic  spin  waves,  since  i)  no  magnetic  Bragg  peaks  are  seen  in  neutron
scattering, as expected for an AF state [137] and, ii) the characteristic energy∼ 6K of such
excitations does not match the characteristic spin-spin interaction energy, which is estimated
as the Weiss constant, approximately 500K, in SCGO [138].  For a sufficiently large density
of the linearly-dispersive excitations, their heat capacity may mask the conventional linear
contribution common in spin glasses [136].

The  quadratic  behaviour C(T )∝ T 2  of  the  heat  capacity  has  also  been  observed  in  the
layered materialNiGa2S4 described in Sec. IV C. In this material, the SRO that develops at
temperatures below the hidden energy scaleT ∗, has a correlation region of 26˚A in the plane
of the layers, and possesses a non-collinear spiral structure.  The non-collinearity, along with
the existence of static SRO, was argued to create the conditions for the so-called Halperin-
Saslow modes [139], which can be thought of as linear-dispersing hydrodynamic excitations.
The theory [139] of such modes was constructed for systems in which the ground state is
comprised of non-collinear spins that are static but not long-range ordered, and while the
theory was developed in the context of conventional spin glass, it should also apply to GF
systems with SRO [140].
                                                                                                               26

Because the Halperin-Saslow modes are linearly dispersive, they can lead to the quadratic
low-temperature dependence C(T )∝T 2 in quasi-2D materials such as NiGa2S4 and other
layered systems.  A conclusive identification of the mechanism of this quadratic behaviour
of the heat capacity requires further investigation.





                         2.    Magnetic-field (in-)dependence of the specific heat


Because the excitations giving rise to the lower-temperature peak in the heat capacityC(T )
are continuously connected to the ground states of the Ising model, the response of those
states to a magnetic field depends on whether or not the respective ground states are mag-
netic.

For Ising spins on the pyrochlore lattice and the SCGO lattice [138], the magnetization in the
ground states is zero.  Because in the presence of weak transverse coupling between spins,
the  low-energy  excitations  are  given  by  superpositions  of  such  states  and  states  obtained
from them by permutations of spins, these low-energy excitations will also be non-magnetic.
On these lattices, the heat capacityC(T ) at low temperaturesT ≲T ∗ will be insensitive to
the magnetic field.

Other lattices, such as the triangular and kagome lattice, allow for nonzero magnetization of
the ground states of the Ising model with nearest-neighbor interactions.  On these lattices,
the low-energy excitations will, in general, be magnetic.  On the kagome lattice, magnetic
low-energy excitations have been observed numerically in Refs. [118, 121, 123, 125, 128, 129,
141].

Experimentally, it has been shown that SrCr9pGa12−9pO19, NiGa2S4, and also Na4Ir3O8
all have peaks inC(T )/T  that are nearly field-independent [68, 136, 142] on Zeeman energy
scales  comparable  to  the  hidden  energy  scale.   While  this  field-independence  is  expected
in SCGO and Na4Ir3O8  based on the above argument, its microscopic mechanism in the
(quasi-2D) compound NiGa2S4  with a triangular lattice calls for further investigation.  In
this material, beyond-nearest-neighbor interactions or interlayer coupling might play a role.
Such interactions are also required to prevent magnetic ordering on the triangular lattice [2–
4].
                                                                                                               27


                    V.    CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS


We have reviewed available data on the specific heat, magnetic susceptibility and neutron
scattering in geometrically frustrated (GF) materials.  The available data for the intensity
of neutron scattering as a function of temperature and for the glass transition temperature
as a function of impurity density suggest the existence of a characteristic energy scale, the
“hidden energy scale” T ∗, which is of the order of 10K in the analyzed materials.

Key  manifestations  of  the  hidden  energy  scale.  The scale T ∗  manifests itself in spin-glass
(SG) freezing at temperaturesT <T ∗ in the cleanest 3D GF materials, i.e.  in materials with
the smallest concentrations of the vacancy impurities, the most common form of quenched
disorder in GF magnets.  Cooling a material to temperatures below T ∗ is also accompanied
by an increase in the intensity of neutron scattering even in materials that do not exhibit
the spin-glass transition due to the low dimensionality.

The  GF  materials  for  which  specific  heat C(T )  data  are  available  in  a  sufficiently  broad
temperature  range  exhibit  two  peaks  in  the  temperature  dependence  of  the  specific  heat
C(T ).  The higher-temperature peak is centered at temperatures of the order of the Weiss
constant θW , while the lower-temperature peak is located near the hidden energy scale T ∗.
Such a structure in C(T ) is supported by abundant numerical simulations of small clusters
of spins on geometrically frustrating lattices.

The origin of the hidden energy scale and spin-glass transition.  The SG freezing observed at
a temperature of orderT ∗ in many rather clean GF materials raises the question of whether
QSLs are achievable in GF systems or always get replaced by an SG state.  This question,
in part, motivated the current work.  While in our view, there is not a precise, commonly
accepted definition of a QSL, an SG state is considered to be incompatible with a QSL.

In  most  GF  systems,  the  main  source  of  quenched  disorder,  which  is  necessary  for  the
existence of an SG state, is vacancy defects.  It has remained a puzzle for a while what causes
the SG transitions in the purest GF materials,  with vacancy defects virtually eliminated.
The existence of such SG transitions in rather clean GF systems seems to have created a
school of thought that the SG transition is caused by a nearly immeasurable type of quenched
disorder, and the SRO observed in, e.g.  neutron scattering, is caused by this glass transition.
                                                                                                                 28

By  contrast,  the  available  facts  summarized  in  this  review  illustrate  that  the  short-range
order (SRO) that forms at temperatures T  below the hidden energy scale T ∗ is a property
of the disorder-free system.  The available facts also suggest that the formation of this SRO
precipitates the SG transition in the presence of weak quenched disorder.

The hidden energy scale comes from the excitations that give rise to the lower-temperature
peak in C(T ).  In a generic XXZ model on a GF lattice, such excitations are continuously
connected to superpositions of Ising ground states when this model is deformed to the Ising
model.  The total entropy of such excitations associated with the lower-temperature peak of
C(T ) matches the entropy of the ground states of the Ising model.  This correspondence is
illustrated by the thermodynamic data in NiGa2S4 and can be used to verify the discussed
origin of the hidden energy in other GF materials.

A GF material, thus, possesses a large density of excitations at the characteristic energyT ∗,
which are no longer activated when the material is cooled down to temperatures T ≲ T ∗.
In the presence of quenched disorder, the freezing out of such excitations leads to a spin-
glass transition.  We emphasize that at such transitions, the properties of the clean medium
are in the driver’s seat:  while quenched disorder is required for SG freezing, the transition
temperature will normally be determined by a crossover in the properties of the clean GF
medium upon cooling.  Although an SG state can be avoided if quenched disorder is com-
pletely eliminated, currently available materials display an SG transition at a temperature
of order T ∗ for a broad range of disorder strengths.

Further  theoretical  advances  are  required  to  explain  various  details  of  the  heat  capacity
C(T ), for example, the observed quadratic temperature dependence C(T )∝T 2 at T≪T ∗
and  the  near-independence  of C(T )  of  the  magnetic  field.   Explaining  these  features  will
require identifying the spin structure of the lowest-energy excitations, as well as evaluating
their dispersion.

Short-range  order.   The  available  neutron-scattering  data  further  confirms  the  formation
of  short-range  order  near  the  hidden  energy  scale.   This  type  of  magnetic  order  is  rather
unusual, distinct from both the long-range magnetic order and spin-glass order, and creates
new exciting possibilities for understanding and manipulating it.

For  example,  a  characteristic  feature  of  neutron  scattering  in  spin  ice  is  the  set  of  pinch
                                                                                                                29

points in the momentum-dependent scattering.  We expect that such structure will be re-
vealed in strongly GF systems, but only in large-q diffusive scattering.  This structure should
coincide with a build up of specific heat,  already seen in a few systems.  The two energy
scales represented by the Weiss temperature and the hidden energy should also be system-
atically probed using specific heat.  This will require measurements over a larger range of
temperatures than is usually accessed.

Magnetic susceptibility and impurities. As we discussed in this review, the magnetic suscepti-
bility in GF magnets follows the Curie-Weiss law, consistent with the mean-field description
of magnetic materials, down to temperatures significantly lower than the Weiss constantθW .
The reason for the persistence of the Curie-Weiss law in the lowest temperature range still
remains to be investigated.

Quenched  disorder  has  a  profound  effect  on  the  magnetic  susceptibility  in  GF  materials.
The most common type of quenched disorder in GF magnets is vacancy defects.  In terms of
magnetic susceptibility, a vacancy defect is equivalent to an effective free spin, a “quasispin”.
Such quasispins lead to the Curie-tail∝Nvac/T  contributions to χ(T ) in the limit of small
concentrations Nvac.   At  larger  vacancy  concentrations,  the  interactions  between  vacancy
quasispins are essential.

While theoretical progress has been achieved in describing quasispins in, e.g., Ising systems,
in the vicinity of quantum criticality, and in materials where vacancies do not disrupt short-
range order, the values of quasispins and their interactions in generic quantum GF materials
remain to be investigated.  As the quasispin behavior has been investigated in terms of linear
response of the magnetic susceptibility,  another question that awaits further study is the
response of defects to larger magnetic fields. If quasispins can display quantum behavior, this
may open new intriguing opportunities for storing and manipulating quantum information
using  quasispins.   Encoded  by  numerous  spins  around  a  vacancy,  the  quantum  state  of  a
quasispin may be expected to be well protected from local noise.

Vacancy defects and the spin-glass transition.  Another, counter-intuitive effect of vacancy
defects on a GF material is the decrease of the spin-glass transition temperature with in-
creasing vacancy concentration.  Conventional intuition and existing models of spin glasses
suggest that increasing the strength of quenched disorder raises the temperature of the glass
transition.  Despite vacancies contribute to the total disorder strength,  adding them to a
                                                                                                             30

clean material has the opposite effect:  they suppress the transition temperature.

As we discussed, in the vacancy-free limit, the glass transition takes place at a temperature
of the order of the hidden energy scale T ∗.  Introducing dilute vacancies disrupts the glass
order and lowers the transition temperature.  While the effect of vacancies on a non-vacancy
glass transition is readily captured by an effective field theory in terms of the glass order
parameter [99], the described trend still awaits a microscopic description.

Finally,  while we have concentrated on analyzing the most easily accessed measurements,
now that the basic spin dynamics framework is established,  other more targeted spectro-
scopies, such as muon spin relaxation and nuclear magnetic resonance, can also be brought
to  bear  on  describing  the  ground  states  and  excitations  in  GF  materials.   Of  particular
interest are the dynamics of excitations below the hidden energy scale,  which both NMR
and µSR have shown signs of [32, 143] and may help to inform the microscopic theory of
low-energy states.




                                    VI.    DATA AVAILABILITY


The data used to generate Figs. 1, 4 and 5 are available from the cited articles, except for the
data for the magnetic susceptibility in SrCr9pGa12−9pO19 with p = 0.98 and p = 0.67.  The
latter data are available from the authors on request.  Figures 2 and 3 have been adapted
with modification from the cited articles.




                                VII.    CONFLICTS OF INTEREST


The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.




                                 VIII.    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


We are grateful to S. Haravifard, P. Popp, M. Sedik, S. Sun, and S. Zhu for collaborations on
the topics of this review. We also appreciate useful discussions with R. Colman, P. Prelov˘sek,
                                                                                                                       31

B. Sbierski, and M. Ulaga.  This work has been supported by the NSF grant DMR2218130.





  [1]P. Anderson, Resonating valence bonds:  A new kind of insulator?, Materials Research Bul-

       letin 8, 153 (1973).

  [2]B. Bernu, C. Lhuillier, and L. Pierre, Signature of N´eel order in exact spectra of quantum
       antiferromagnets on finite lattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2590 (1992).

  [3]L. Capriotti, A. E. Trumper, and S. Sorella, Long-Range N´eel Order in the Triangular Heisen-

       berg Model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3899 (1999).
  [4]S. R. White and A. L. Chernyshev, Ne´el order in square and triangular lattice heisenberg

       models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 127004 (2007).

  [5]L. Savary and L. Balents, Quantum spin liquids:  a review, Reports on Progress in Physics
       80, 016502 (2016).

  [6]J. Knolle and R. Moessner, A field guide to spin liquids, Annual Review of Condensed Matter

       Physics 10, 451 (2019).
  [7]C.    Broholm,     R.    J.    Cava,     S.    A.    Kivelson,     D.    G.    Nocera,     M.    R.    Nor-

       man,    and    T.    Senthil,    Quantum    spin    liquids,    Science   367,    eaay0668    (2020),

       https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aay0668.
  [8]B. S. Shastry and B. Sutherland, Exact ground state of a quantum mechanical antiferromag-

       net, Physica B+ C 108, 1069 (1981).

  [9]A. Kitaev, Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond, Annals of Physics    321, 2 (2006),
       january Special Issue.

 [10]F. Iga, A. Shigekawa, Y. Hasegawa, S. Michimura, T. Takabatake, S. Yoshii, T. Yamamoto,

       M. Hagiwara, and K. Kindo, Highly anisotropic magnetic phase diagram of a 2-dimensional
       orthogonal dimer system TmB4, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 310, e443

       (2007), proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Magnetism.

 [11]G. Jackeli and G. Khaliullin, Mott Insulators in the Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling Limit: From
       Heisenberg to a Quantum Compass and Kitaev Models, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 017205 (2009).

 [12]R. D. Johnson,  S. C. Williams,  A. A. Haghighirad,  J. Singleton,  V. Zapf,  P. Manuel,  I. I.

       Mazin,  Y.  Li,  H.  O.  Jeschke,  R.  Valent´ı,  and  R.  Coldea,  Monoclinic  crystal  structure  of
                                                                                                                       32


      α− RuCl3 and the zigzag antiferromagnetic ground state, Phys. Rev. B 92, 235119 (2015).

[13]Y. Kubota, H. Tanaka, T. Ono, Y. Narumi, and K. Kindo, Successive magnetic phase tran-

      sitions inα− RuCl3:  XY-like frustrated magnet on the honeycomb lattice, Phys. Rev. B 91,
      094422 (2015).

[14]J. A. Sears,  M. Songvilay,  K. W. Plumb,  J. P. Clancy,  Y. Qiu,  Y. Zhao,  D. Parshall, and

      Y.-J. Kim, Magnetic order inα− RuCl3:  A honeycomb-lattice quantum magnet with strong
      spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 91, 144420 (2015).

[15]A.   Banerjee,   J.   Yan,   J.   Knolle,   C.   A.   Bridges,   M.   B.   Stone,   M.   D.   Lumsden,

      D.  G.  Mandrus,   D.  A.  Tennant,   R.  Moessner,  and  S.  E.  Nagler,  Neutron  scatter-
      ing   in   the   proximate   quantum   spin   liquid α − RuCl3,   Science  356,   1055   (2017),

      https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aah6015.

[16]Y. Kasahara, T. Ohnishi, Y. Mizukami, O. Tanaka, S. Ma, K. Sugii, N. Kurita, H. Tanaka,
      J. Nasu, Y. Motome,  et  al., Majorana quantization and half-integer thermal quantum Hall

      effect in a Kitaev spin liquid, Nature 559, 227 (2018).

[17]P. Czajka, T. Gao, M. Hirschberger, P. Lampen-Kelley, A. Banerjee, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus,
      S. E. Nagler, and N. Ong, Oscillations of the thermal conductivity in the spin-liquid state of

      α-RuCl3, Nature Physics 17, 915 (2021).

[18]J.  Zheng,  K.  Ran,  T.  Li,  J.  Wang,  P.  Wang,  B.  Liu,  Z.-X.  Liu,  B.  Normand,  J.  Wen,
      and W. Yu, Gapless Spin Excitations in the Field-Induced Quantum Spin Liquid Phase of

      α−RuCl3, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 227208 (2017).

[19]J.    A.    N.    Bruin,    R.    R.    Claus,    Y.    Matsumoto,    J.    Nuss,    S.    Laha,    B.    V.

      Lotsch,    N.    Kurita,    H.    Tanaka,    and    H.    Takagi,    Origin    of    oscillatory    struc-
      tures    in    the    magnetothermal    conductivity    of    the    putative    Kitaev    magnet  α-

      RuCl3,    APL    Materials    10,    090703    (2022),    https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apm/article-

      pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0101377/19751661/090703                 1  5.0101377.pdf.
[20]J. Bruin, R. Claus, Y. Matsumoto, N. Kurita, H. Tanaka, and H. Takagi, Robustness of the

      thermal Hall effect close to half-quantization in α-RuCl3, Nature Physics 18, 401 (2022).

[21]E. Lefran¸cois, J. Baglo, Q. Barth´elemy, S. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, and L. Taillefer, Oscillations in
      the magnetothermal conductivity ofα−RuCl3: Evidence of transition anomalies, Phys. Rev.

      B 107, 064408 (2023).

[22]G. H. Wannier, Antiferromagnetism. the triangular ising net, Phys. Rev.      79, 357 (1950).
                                                                                                                     33


[23]P. W. Anderson, Ordering and antiferromagnetism in ferrites, Phys. Rev.      102, 1008 (1956).

[24]A. Ramirez, Thermodynamic measurements on geometrically frustrated magnets, Journal of

      applied physics 70, 5952 (1991).
[25]C. Lacroix, P. Mendels, and F. Mila,       Introduction to frustrated magnetism:  materials, exper-

      iments, theory, Vol. 164 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2011).

[26]J.  R.  Chamorro,  T.  M.  McQueen,  and  T.  T.  Tran,  Chemistry  of  quantum  spin  liquids,
      Chemical Reviews 121, 2898 (2020).

[27]Y. Zhou, K. Kanoda, and T.-K. Ng, Quantum spin liquid states, Rev. Mod. Phys.      89, 025003

      (2017).
[28]L. Clark and A. H. Abdeldaim, Quantum spin liquids from a materials perspective, Annual

      Review of Materials Research 51, 495 (2021).

[29]P. Merchant, B. Normand, K. Kr¨amer, M. Boehm, D. McMorrow, and C. R¨uegg, Quantum
      and  classical  criticality  in  a  dimerized  quantum  antiferromagnet,  Nature  physics  10,  373

      (2014).

[30]I. Kimchi, J. P. Sheckelton, T. M. McQueen, and P. A. Lee, Scaling and data collapse from
      local  moments  in  frustrated  disordered  quantum  spin  systems,  Nature  communications 9,

      4367 (2018).

[31]L. J. D. Jongh and A. R. Miedema, Experiments on simple magnetic model systems, Advances
      in Physics 50, 947 (2001), https://doi.org/10.1080/00018730110101412.

[32]H. Takeya, K. Ishida, K. Kitagawa, Y. Ihara, K. Onuma, Y. Maeno, Y. Nambu, S. Nakatsuji,

      D. E. MacLaughlin, A. Koda, and R. Kadono, Spin dynamics and spin freezing behavior in

      the  two-dimensional  antiferromagnet  NiGa2S4  revealed  by  Ga-NMR,  NQR  and µSR  mea-
      surements, Phys. Rev. B 77, 054429 (2008).

[33]Y. J. Uemura, A. Keren, K. Kojima, L. P. Le, G. M. Luke, W. D. Wu, Y. Ajiro, T. Asano,

      Y.  Kuriyama,  M.  Mekata,  H.  Kikuchi,  and  K.  Kakurai,  Spin  Fluctuations  in  Frustrated
      Kagom´e Lattice System SrCr8Ga4O19  Studied by Muon Spin Relaxation, Phys. Rev. Lett.

      73, 3306 (1994).

[34]D.  Bono,  P.  Mendels,  G.  Collin,  N.  Blanchard,  F.  Bert,  A.  Amato,  C.  Baines,  and  A.  D.
      Hillier, µSR study of the quantum dynamics in the frustrated s =  32  kagom´e bilayers, Phys.

      Rev. Lett. 93, 187201 (2004).
                                                                                                                    34


[35]P. Popp, A. P. Ramirez, and S. Syzranov, Origin of the hidden energy scale and the   f-ratio in

     geometrically frustrated magnets, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2406.12966 (2024), arXiv:2406.12966

     [cond-mat.str-el].
[36]J. S. Helton, K. Matan, M. P. Shores, E. A. Nytko, B. M. Bartlett, Y. Yoshida, Y. Takano,

     A. Suslov, Y. Qiu, J.-H. Chung, D. G. Nocera, and Y. S. Lee, Spin Dynamics of the Spin-1/2

     Kagome Lattice Antiferromagnet ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 107204 (2007).
[37]M. Lafontaine, A. Le Bail, and G. F´erey, Copper-containing minerals—I.   Cu3V2O7(OH)2,

     2H2O:  The synthetichomolog of volborthite; crystal structure determination from X-ray and

     neutron data; structural correlations, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 85, 220 (1990).
[38]Z.  Hiroi,  M.  Hanawa,  N.  Kobayashi,  M.  Nohara,  H.  Takagi,  Y.  Kato,  and  M.  Takigawa,

     Spin-1/2 Kagom´e-Like Lattice in Volborthite Cu3V2O7(OH)22H2O, Journal of the Physical

     Society of Japan 70, 3377 (2001).
[39]H. Yoshida, Y. Okamoto, T. Tayama, T. Sakakibara, M. Tokunaga, A. Matsuo, Y. Narumi,

     K.  Kindo,  M.  Yoshida,  M.  Takigawa,  and  Z.  Hiroi,  Magnetization  “steps”  on  a  kagome

     lattice   in   volborthite,   Journal   of   the   Physical   Society   of   Japan  78,   043704   (2009),
     https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.78.043704.

[40]M. Yoshida, Y. Okamoto, M. Takigawa, and Z. Hiroi, Magnetic order in the spin-1/2 kagome

     antiferromagnet  vesignieite,  Journal  of  the  Physical  Society  of  Japan  82,  013702  (2013),
     https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.82.013702.

[41]O.  Janson,  J.  Richter,  and  H.  Rosner,  Modified  Kagome  Physics  in  the  Natural  Spin-

     1/2 Kagome Lattice Systems:  Kapellasite Cu3Zn(OH)6Cl2 and Haydeeite Cu3Mg(OH)6Cl2,

     Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 106403 (2008).
[42]R. Colman, A. Sinclair, and A. Wills, Comparisons between Haydeeite,   α−Cu3Mg(OD)6Cl2,

     and Kapellasite, α−Cu3Zn(OD)6Cl2, Isostructural S = 1/2 Kagome Magnets, Chemistry

     of Materials 22, 5774 (2010), https://doi.org/10.1021/cm101594c.
[43]T.-H. Han, J. Singleton, and J. A. Schlueter, Barlowite:  A spin-1  /2 antiferromagnet with a

     geometrically perfect kagome motif, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 227203 (2014).

[44]X. Y. Yue, Z. W. Ouyang, J. F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, Z. C. Xia, and Z. Z. He, Magnetization
     and esr studies on Cu4(OH)6FCl:  An antiferromagnet with a kagome lattice, Phys. Rev. B

     97, 054417 (2018).
                                                                                                                     35


[45]J. Greedan, M. Sato, X. Yan, and F. Razavi, Spin-glass-like behavior in   Y2Mo2O7, a con-

      centrated, crystalline system with negligible apparent disorder, Solid State Communications

      59, 895 (1986).
[46]P.  M.  M.  Thygesen,  J.  A.  M.  Paddison,  R.  Zhang,  K.  A.  Beyer,  K.  W.  Chapman,  H.  Y.

      Playford,  M. G. Tucker,  D. A. Keen,  M. A. Hayward, and A. L. Goodwin, Orbital Dimer

      Model for the Spin-Glass State in Y2Mo2O7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 067201 (2017).
[47]P.  G.  LaBarre,   D.  Phelan,   Y.  Xin,   F.  Ye,   T.  Besara,   T.  Siegrist,   S.  V.  Syzranov,

      S. Rosenkranz, and A. P. Ramirez, Fluctuation-induced interactions and the spin-glass tran-

      sition in Fe2TiO5, Phys. Rev. B 103, L220404 (2021).
[48]A.  Kancko,  G.  Giester,  and  R.  H.  Colman,  Structural  and  spin-glass  properties  of  single

      crystal Jeff  = 1/2 pyrochlore antiferromagnet NaCdCo2F7:  correlating Tf with magnetic-

      bond-disorder, Physica Scripta 98, 075947 (2023).
[49]J. B. Goodenough,       Magnetism and the chemical bond  (R. E. Krieger Pub. Co., 1963).

[50]H. Martinho, N. O. Moreno, J. A. Sanjurjo, C. Rettori, A. J. Garc´ıa-Adeva, D. L. Huber,

      S. B. Oseroff, W. Ratcliff, S.-W. Cheong, P. G. Pagliuso, J. L. Sarrao, and G. B. Martins,
      Magnetic properties of the frustrated antiferromagnetic spinel ZnCr2O4  and the spin-glass

      Zn1−xCdxCr2O4 (x = 0.05, 0.10), Phys. Rev. B 64, 024408 (2001).

[51]C. H. Booth, J. S. Gardner, G. H. Kwei, R. H. Heffner, F. Bridges, and M. A. Subramanian,
      Local lattice disorder in the geometrically frustrated spin-glass pyrochlore y2mo2o7, Phys.

      Rev. B 62, R755 (2000).

[52]N.  Blanc,  J.  Trinh,  L.  Dong,  X.  Bai,  A.  A.  Aczel,  M.  Mourigal,  L.  Balents,  T.  Siegrist,

      and A. Ramirez, Quantum criticality among entangled spin chains, Nature Physics 14, 273
      (2018).

[53]L. A. Fernandez, E. Marinari, V. Martin-Mayor, G. Parisi, and J. J. Ruiz-Lorenzo, Universal

      critical behavior of the two-dimensional ising spin glass, Phys. Rev. B 94, 024402 (2016).
[54]C. Dekker, A. F. M. Arts, H. W. de Wijn, A. J. van Duyneveldt, and J. A. Mydosh, Activated

      Dynamics in the Two-Dimensional Ising Spin-Glass Rb2Cu1−xCoxF4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61,

      1780 (1988).
[55]Y. Shimizu,  K. Miyagawa,  K. Kanoda,  M. Maesato, and G. Saito, Spin liquid state in an

      organic mott insulator with a triangular lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 107001 (2003).
                                                                                                                   36


[56]Z. Ma, J. Wang, Z.-Y. Dong, J. Zhang, S. Li, S.-H. Zheng, Y. Yu, W. Wang, L. Che, K. Ran,

     S. Bao, Z. Cai, P.  ˇCerm´ak, A. Schneidewind, S. Yano, J. S. Gardner, X. Lu, S.-L. Yu, J.-M.

     Liu, S. Li, J.-X. Li, and J. Wen, Spin-Glass Ground State in a Triangular-Lattice Compound
     YbZnGaO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 087201 (2018).

[57]K. Kitagawa,  T. Takayama,  Y. Matsumoto,  A. Kato,  R. Takano,  Y. Kishimoto,  S. Bette,

     R. Dinnebier, G. Jackeli, and H. Takagi, A spin–orbital-entangled quantum liquid on a hon-
     eycomb lattice, Nature 554, 341 (2018).

[58]M. Fujihala, X. G. Zheng, Y. Oohara, H. Morodomi, T. Kawae, A. Matsuo, and K. Kindo,

     Short-range correlations and persistent spin fluctuations in the undistorted kagome lattice
     Ising antiferromagnet Co3Mg(OH)6Cl2, Phys. Rev. B 85, 012402 (2012).

[59]R. Zhong,  S. Guo, and R. J. Cava, Frustrated magnetism in the layered triangular lattice

     materials K2Co(SeO3)2 and Rb2Co(SeO3)2, Phys. Rev. Mater. 4, 084406 (2020).
[60]M. J. Harris, S. T. Bramwell, D. F. McMorrow, T. Zeiske, and K. W. Godfrey, Geometrical

     Frustration in the Ferromagnetic Pyrochlore Ho2Ti2O7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2554 (1997).

[61]A. P. Ramirez, A. Hayashi, R. J. Cava, R. Siddharthan, and B. Shastry, Zero-point entropy
     in ‘spin ice’, Nature 399, 333 (1999).

[62]J. Snyder, B. G. Ueland, A. Mizel, J. S. Slusky, H. Karunadasa, R. J. Cava, and P. Schiffer,

     Quantum and thermal spin relaxation in the diluted spin ice Dy2−xMxTi2O7 (M = Lu, Y),
     Phys. Rev. B 70, 184431 (2004).

[63]B. C. den Hertog and M. J. P. Gingras, Dipolar interactions and origin of spin ice in ising

     pyrochlore magnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3430 (2000).

[64]R. Nirmala, K.-H. Jang, H. Sim, H. Cho, J. Lee, N.-G. Yang, S. Lee, R. Ibberson, K. Kakurai,
     M. Matsuda, et al., Spin glass behavior in frustrated quantum spin system CuAl2O4 with a

     possible orbital liquid state, Journal of Physics:  Condensed Matter 29, 13LT01 (2017).

[65]L. A. Fenner, A. S. Wills, S. T. Bramwell, M. Dahlberg, and P. Schiffer, Zero-point entropy
     of the spinel spin glassesCuGa2O4 andCuAl2O4, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 145,

     012029 (2009).

[66]A. H. Cooke, R. Lazenby, F. R. McKim, J. Owen, W. P. Wolf, and B. Bleaney, Exchange
     interactions in antiferromagnetic salts of iridium II. Magnetic susceptibility measurements,

     Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences

     250, 97 (1959), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.1098/rspa.1959.0053.
                                                                                                                      37


[67]A. D. LaForge, S. H. Pulido, R. J. Cava, B. C. Chan, and A. P. Ramirez, Quasispin glass in

      a geometrically frustrated magnet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 017203 (2013).

[68]Y. Okamoto, M. Nohara, H. Aruga-Katori, and H. Takagi, Spin-Liquid State in the   S = 1/2
      Hyperkagome Antiferromagnet Na4Ir3O8, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 137207 (2007).

[69]A.  P.  Ramirez,  B.  S.  Shastry,  A.  Hayashi,  J.  J.  Krajewski,  D.  A.  Huse,  and  R.  J.  Cava,

      Multiple Field-Induced Phase Transitions in the Geometrically Frustrated Dipolar Magnet:
      Gd2Ti2O7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 067202 (2002).

[70]The data for   SrCr9pGa12−9pO19 with p = 0.98 and p = 0.67 is available on request.

[71]A.   P.   Ramirez,   C.   Broholm,   S.   H.   Lee,   M.   F.   Collins,   L.   Heller,   C.   Kloc,   and
      E.  Bucher,  Magnetism  in  a  chromium  jarosite  Kagom´e  lattice  KCr3  (OH)6  (SO4)2  (ab-

      stract),  Journal  of  Applied  Physics 73,  5658  (1993),  https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article-

      pdf/73/10/5658/18657207/5658             1 online.pdf.
[72]S.  Nakatsuji,  Y.  Nambu,  H.  Tonomura,  O.  Sakai,  S.  Jonas,  C.  Broholm,  H.  Tsunetsugu,

      Y.  Qiu,  and  Y.  Maeno,  Spin  disorder  on  a  triangular  lattice,  Science  309,  1697  (2005),

      https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1114727.
[73]I. S. Hagemann, Q. Huang, X. P. A. Gao, A. P. Ramirez, and R. J. Cava, Geometric Mag-

      netic Frustration in Ba2Sn2Ga3ZnCr7O22: A Two-Dimensional Spinel Based Kagom´e Lattice,

      Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 894 (2001).
[74]Y.  Nambu  and  S.  Nakatsuji,  Two-dimensional  magnetism  and  spin-size  effect  in  the  S  =

      1 triangular antiferromagnet NiGa2S4, Journal of Physics:  Condensed Matter 23, 164202

      (2011).

[75]K. Binder and A. P. Young, Spin glasses:  Experimental facts, theoretical concepts, and open
      questions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 801 (1986).

[76]A. P. Ramirez, G. P. Espinosa, and A. S. Cooper, Strong frustration and dilution-enhanced

      order in a quasi-2D spin glass, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2070 (1990).
[77]M. Gingras, C. Stager, B. Gaulin, N. Raju, and J. Greedan, Nonlinear susceptibility mea-

      surements at the spin-glass transition of the pyrochlore antiferromagnet Y2Mo2O7, Journal

      of applied physics 79, 6170 (1996).
[78]P. Schiffer and I. Daruka, Two-population model for anomalous low-temperature magnetism

      in geometrically frustrated magnets, Phys. Rev. B 56, 13712 (1997).
                                                                                                                        38


[79]A.  W.  Sandvik,  E.  Dagotto,  and  D.  J.  Scalapino,  Nonmagnetic  impurities  in  spin-gapped

      and gapless Heisenberg antiferromagnets, Phys. Rev. B 56, 11701 (1997).

[80]S.  Sachdev,  C.  Buragohain,  and  M.  Vojta,  Quantum  impurity  in  a  nearly  critical  two-
      dimensional antiferromagnet, Science 286, 2479 (1999).

[81]K. H. H¨oglund and A. W. Sandvik, Susceptibility of the 2D Spin-        12  Heisenberg Antiferro-

      magnet with an Impurity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 077204 (2003).
[82]V. S. Maryasin and M. E. Zhitomirsky, Triangular antiferromagnet with nonmagnetic impu-

      rities, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 247201 (2013).

[83]V. S. Maryasin and M. E. Zhitomirsky, Collective impurity effects in the heisenberg triangular
      antiferromagnet, Journal of Physics:  Conference Series 592, 012112 (2015).

[84]S. Sun, A. P. Ramirez, and S. Syzranov, Quasispins of vacancy defects in ising chains with

      nearest- and next-to-nearest-neighbor interactions, Phys. Rev. B 108, 174436 (2023).
[85]S. Katsura and B. Tsujiyama, Ferro- and antiferromagnetism of dilute Ising model, in       Critical

      phenomena  (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1966) pp.

      219 – 225.
[86]M. Wortis, Griffiths singularities in the randomly dilute one-dimensional ising model, Phys.

      Rev. B 10, 4665 (1974).

[87]L. Bogani, R. Sessoli, M. G. Pini, A. Rettori, M. A. Novak, P. Rosa, M. Massi, M. E. Fedi,
      L. Giuntini, A. Caneschi, and D. Gatteschi, Finite-size effects on the static properties of a

      single-chain magnet, Phys. Rev. B 72, 064406 (2005).

[88]S.  V.  Goupalov  and  D.  C.  Mattis,  Magnetic  susceptibilities  of  finite  Ising  chains  in  the

      presence of defect sites, Phys. Rev. B 76, 224412 (2007).
[89]V.  Val’kov  and  M.  Shustin,  Effect  of  intersite  repulsion  on  the  correlation  functions  and

      thermodynamics of an Ising chain with annealed magnetic disorder, Bulletin of the Russian

      Academy of Sciences:  Physics 80, 1335 (2016).
[90]M.  Sedik,  S.  Sun,  A.  P.  Ramirez,  and  S.  Syzranov,  Quasispins  of  vacancy  defects  and

      their interactions in disordered antiferromagnets, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2404.05845 (2024),

      arXiv:2404.05845 [cond-mat.dis-nn].
[91]A. Wollny, E. C. Andrade, and M. Vojta, Singular field response and singular screening of

      vacancies in antiferromagnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 177203 (2012).
                                                                                                                        39


 [92]A.  Wollny,  L.  Fritz,  and  M.  Vojta,  Fractional  impurity  moments  in  two-dimensional  non-

       collinear magnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 137204 (2011).

 [93]K. H. H¨oglund and A. W. Sandvik, Anomalous Curie Response of Impurities in Quantum-
       Critical Spin-1/2 Heisenberg Antiferromagnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 027205 (2007).

 [94]S. V. Syzranov and A. P. Ramirez, Eminuscent phase in frustrated magnets:  a challenge to

       quantum spin liquids, Nature Communications 13, 2993 (2022).
 [95]V. S. Dotsenko, Physics of the spin-glass state, Physics-Uspekhi      36, 455 (1993).

 [96]M. M´ezard, G. Parisi, and M. A. Virasoro,        Spin  glass  theory  and  beyond:  An  Introduction

       to  the  Replica  Method  and  Its  Applications,  Vol.  9  (World  Scientific  Publishing  Company,
       1987).

 [97]With the exception of the compounds   Fe3−3xGa3x−1Ti5, in which a significantly higher glass-

       transition temperature may be attributable to the formation of antiferromagnetic clusters [47,
       144].

 [98]H. Maletta and W. Felsch, Insulating spin-glass system Eu       xSr1−xS, Phys. Rev. B 20, 1245

       (1979).
 [99]S.  Syzranov,  Effect  of  vacancy  defects  on  geometrically  frustrated  magnets,  Phys.  Rev.  B

       106, L140202 (2022).

[100]C. L. Henley, The “Coulomb Phase” in Frustrated Systems, Annual Review of Condensed
       Matter Physics 1, 179 (2010), https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-070909-104138.

[101]Y. Tabata, H. Kadowaki, K. Matsuhira, Z. Hiroi, N. Aso, E. Ressouche, and B. F˚ak, Kagom´e

       Ice State in the Dipolar Spin Ice Dy2Ti2O7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 257205 (2006).

[102]T.   Fennell,    P.   P.   Deen,    A.   R.   Wildes,    K.   Schmalzl,    D.   Prabhakaran,    A.   T.
       Boothroyd,     R.    J.    Aldus,     D.    F.    McMorrow,    and    S.    T.    Bramwell,    Mag-

       netic    Coulomb    Phase    in    the    Spin    Ice  Ho2Ti2O7,    Science   326,    415    (2009),

       https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1177582.
[103]C. Broholm,  G. Aeppli,  G. P. Espinosa, and A. S. Cooper, Antiferromagnetic fluctuations

       and short-range order in a kagom´e lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3173 (1990).

[104]J. Yang, A. Samarakoon, S. Dissanayake, H. Ueda, I. Klich, K. Iida, D. Pajerowski, N. P.
       Butch, Q. Huang, J. R. D. Copley, and S.-H. Lee, Spin jam induced by quantum fluctuations

       in a frustrated magnet, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 11519 (2015),

       https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1503126112.
                                                                                                                     40


[105]C. Stock, S. Jonas, C. Broholm, S. Nakatsuji, Y. Nambu, K. Onuma, Y. Maeno, and J.-H.

       Chung, Neutron-Scattering Measurement of Incommensurate Short-Range Order in Single

       Crystals of the S  = 1 Triangular Antiferromagnet NiGa2S4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 037402
       (2010).

[106]J. S. Gardner, B. D. Gaulin, S.-H. Lee, C. Broholm, N. P. Raju, and J. E. Greedan, Glassy

       Statics  and  Dynamics  in  the  Chemically  Ordered  Pyrochlore  Antiferromagnet Y2Mo2O7,
       Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 211 (1999).

[107]J. A. Mydosh,         Spin glasses:  an experimental introduction  (CRC Press, 1993).

[108]D. S. Greywall and P. A. Busch, Heat capacity of            3He adsorbed on graphite at millikelvin
       temperatures and near third-layer promotion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1868 (1989).

[109]K.  Ishida,  M.  Morishita,  K.  Yawata,  and  H.  Fukuyama,  Low  temperature  heat-capacity

       anomalies in two-dimensional solid  3He, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3451 (1997).
[110]M. M. Bordelon, E. Kenney, C. Liu, T. Hogan, L. Posthuma, M. Kavand, Y. Lyu, M. Sher-

       win, N. P. Butch, C. Brown,  et  al., Field-tunable quantum disordered ground state in the

       triangular-lattice antiferromagnet NaYbO2, Nature Physics 15, 1058 (2019).
[111]K. M. Ranjith, S. Luther, T. Reimann, B. Schmidt, P. Schlender, J. Sichelschmidt, H. Ya-

       suoka,  A.  M.  Strydom,  Y.  Skourski,  J.  Wosnitza,  H.  K¨uhne,  T.  Doert,  and  M.  Baenitz,

       Anisotropic  field-induced  ordering  in  the  triangular-lattice  quantum  spin  liquid  NaYbSe2,
       Phys. Rev. B 100, 224417 (2019).

[112]P. Schiffer,  A. P. Ramirez,  D. A. Huse,  P. L. Gammel,  U. Yaron,  D. J. Bishop, and A. J.

       Valentino, Frustration induced spin freezing in a site-ordered magnet:  Gadolinium gallium

       garnet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2379 (1995).
[113]V. Elser, Nuclear antiferromagnetism  in a registered            3He solid, Phys.  Rev. Lett. 62, 2405

       (1989).

[114]C. Zeng and V. Elser, Numerical studies of antiferromagnetism on a kagom´e net, Phys. Rev.
       B 42, 8436 (1990).

[115]N. Elstner and A. P. Young, Spin-1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet on the kagome        ´ lattice:

       High-temperature expansion and exact-diagonalization studies, Phys. Rev. B 50, 6871 (1994).
[116]T. Nakamura and S. Miyashita, Thermodynamic properties of the quantum Heisenberg an-

       tiferromagnet on the kagom´e lattice, Phys. Rev. B 52, 9174 (1995).
                                                                                                                      41


[117]P. Tomczak and J. Richter, Thermodynamical properties of the Heisenberg antiferromagnet

       on the kagom´e lattice, Phys. Rev. B 54, 9004 (1996).

[118]P.  Sindzingre,  G.  Misguich,  C.  Lhuillier,  B.  Bernu,  L.  Pierre,  C.  Waldtmann,  and  H.-U.
       Everts, Magnetothermodynamics of the spin-   12  kagom´e antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. Lett.

       84, 2953 (2000).

[119]G.  Misguich  and  B.  Bernu,  Specific  heat  of  the    S  =   12  Heisenberg  model  on  the  kagome
       lattice:  High-temperature series expansion analysis, Phys. Rev. B 71, 014417 (2005).

[120]G. Misguich and P. Sindzingre, Magnetic susceptibility and specific heat of the spin-            12 Heisen-

       berg model on the kagome lattice and experimental data on ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2, The European
       Physical Journal B 59, 305–309 (2007).

[121]M. Isoda,  H. Nakano, and T. Sakai, Specific heat and magnetic susceptibility of Ising-like

       anisotropic Heisenberg model on kagome lattice, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan
       80, 084704 (2011).

[122]P. Prelovˇsek and J. Kokalj, Finite-temperature properties of the extended Heisenberg model

       on a triangular lattice, Phys. Rev. B 98, 035107 (2018).
[123]J. Schnack, J. Schulenburg, and J. Richter, Magnetism of the    N  = 42 kagome lattice anti-

       ferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 98, 094423 (2018).

[124]L.  Chen,  D.-W.  Qu,  H.  Li,  B.-B.  Chen,  S.-S.  Gong,  J.  von  Delft,  A.  Weichselbaum,  and
       W. Li, Two-temperature scales in the triangular-lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys.

       Rev. B 99, 140404 (2019).

[125]P. Prelovˇsek, K. Morita, T. Tohyama, and J. Herbrych, Vanishing wilson ratio as the hallmark

       of quantum spin-liquid models, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 023024 (2020).
[126]K. Seki and S. Yunoki, Thermodynamic properties of an    S =  12  ring-exchange model on the

       triangular lattice, Phys. Rev. B 101, 235115 (2020).

[127]T. Hutak, T. Krokhmalskii, J. Schnack, J. Richter, and O. Derzhko, Thermodynamics of the
       s =  12  hyperkagome-lattice heisenberg antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 110, 054428 (2024).

[128]M. Ulaga, J. Kokalj, A. Wietek, A. Zorko, and P. Prelovˇsek, Finite-temperature properties

       of the easy-axis Heisenberg model on frustrated lattices, Phys. Rev. B 109, 035110 (2024).
[129]M. Ulaga, J. Kokalj, and P. Prelovˇsek, Easy-axis Heisenberg model on the triangular lattice:

       from supersolid to gapped solid, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2408.05034 (2024), arXiv:2408.05034

       [cond-mat.str-el].
                                                                                                                      42


[130]C.-O.  Hwang,  S.-Y.  Kim,  D.  Kang,  and  J.  M.  Kim,  Thermodynamic  properties  of  the

       triangular-lattice  Ising  antiferromagnet  in  a  uniform  magnetic  field,  J.  Korean  Phys.  Soc.

       52, 203 (2008).
[131]S.-Y. Kim, Ising antiferromagnet on a finite triangular lattice with free boundary conditions,

       J. Korean Phys. Soc. 67, 1517 (2015).

[132]K. Kanˆo and S. Naya, Antiferromagnetism. the kagom´e Ising net, Progress of Theoretical
       Physics 10, 158 (1953).

[133]R. R. P. Singh and M. Rigol, Thermodynamic properties of kagome antiferromagnets with

       different perturbations, Journal of Physics:  Conference Series 145, 012003 (2009).
[134]G. C. Lau, R. S. Freitas, B. G. Ueland, B. D. Muegge, E. L. Duncan, P. Schiffer, and R. J.

       Cava, Zero-point entropy in stuffed spin-ice, Nature Physics 2, 249–253 (2006).

[135]B.  Mart´ınez,  F.  Sandiumenge,  A.  Rouco,  A.  Labarta,  J.  Rodr´ıguez-Carvajal,  M.  Tovar,
       M. Causa,  S. Gal´ı, and X. Obradors, Magnetic dilution in the strongly frustrated kagome

       antiferromagnet SrGa12−xCrxO19, Phys. Rev. B 46, 10786 (1992).

[136]P. W. Anderson, B. I. Halperin, and C. M. Varma, Anomalous low-temperature thermal prop-
       erties of glasses and spin glasses, The Philosophical Magazine:  A Journal of Theoretical Ex-

       perimental and Applied Physics 25, 1 (1972), https://doi.org/10.1080/14786437208229210.

[137]C. Broholm,  G. Aeppli,  G. P. Espinosa, and A. S. Cooper, Antiferromagnetic fluctuations
       and short-range order in a kagom´e lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3173 (1990).

[138]A. P. Ramirez, G. P. Espinosa, and A. S. Cooper, Elementary excitations in a diluted anti-

       ferromagnetic kagom´e lattice, Phys. Rev. B 45, 2505 (1992).

[139]B. I. Halperin and W. M. Saslow, Hydrodynamic theory of spin waves in spin glasses and
       other systems with noncollinear spin orientations, Phys. Rev. B 16, 2154 (1977).

[140]D.  Podolsky  and  Y.  B.  Kim,  Halperin-saslow  modes  as  the  origin  of  the  low-temperature

       anomaly in niga2s4, Phys. Rev. B 79, 140402 (2009).
[141]C.  Waldtmann,  H.-U.  Everts,  B.  Bernu,  C.  Lhuillier,  P.  Sindzingre,  P.  Lecheminant,  and

       L. Pierre, First excitations of the spin 1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet on the kagom´e lattice,

       The European Physical Journal B 2, 501–507 (1998).
[142]A. P. Ramirez, B. Hessen, and M. Winklemann, Entropy balance and evidence for local spin

       singlets in a kagom´e-like magnet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2957 (2000).
                                                                                                                    43


[143]L. Limot, P. Mendels, G. Collin, C. Mondelli, B. Ouladdiaf, H. Mutka, N. Blanchard, and

       M. Mekata, Susceptibility and dilution effects of the kagom´e bilayer geometrically frustrated

       network:  A Ga NMR study of SrCr9pGa12−9pO19, Phys. Rev. B 65, 144447 (2002).
[144]D. Phelan, F. Ye, H. Zheng, E. Krivyakina, A. Samarakoon, P. LaBarre, J. Neu, T. Siegrist,

       S. Rosenkranz, S. Syzranov, et al., The geometrically frustrated spin glass (Fe1−pGap)2TiO5,

       Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations and Advances 79, a247 (2023).