              Quantum Optimization Benchmarking Library
                                  The Intractable Decathlon

    Thorsten Koch  ∗1, 2, David E. Bernal Neira3, Ying Chen4, Giorgio Cortiana5,
       Daniel J. Egger6, Raoul Heese7, Narendra N. Hegade8, Alejandro Gomez
  Cadavid8,9, Rhea Huang10, Toshinari Itoko11, Thomas Kleinert12, Pedro Maciel
    Xavier3, 13, Naeimeh Mohseni5, Jhon A. Montanez-Barrera14, Koji Nakano15,
Giacomo Nannicini10, Corey O’Meara5, Justin Pauckert16, Manuel Proissl6, Anurag
 Ramesh3, Maximilian Schicker1, Noriaki Shimada11, Mitsuharu Takeori11, V´ıctor
          Valls17, David Van Bulck18, Stefan Woerner  †6, and Christa Zoufal  ‡6

                                               1Zuse Institute Berlin
                                          2Technische Universit¨at Berlin
                        3Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University
                                        4National University of Singapore
                                         5E.ON Digital Technology GmbH
                                6IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe – Zurich
                                                     7NTT Data
                                              8Kipu Quantum GmbH
                                 9University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU
                                       10University of Southern California
                                     11IBM Quantum, IBM Research Tokyo
                                                   12Quantagonia
                                      13Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
                                            14Forschungszentrum J¨ulich
                                              15Hiroshima University
                                         16T-Systems International GmbH
                                17IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe – Dublin
                                                 18Ghent University

                                             September 16, 2025



                                                      Abstract
          Through  recent  progress  in  hardware  development,  quantum  computers  have  advanced
       to the point where benchmarking  of (heuristic) quantum algorithms at scale is within reach.
       Particularly in combinatorial optimization–where most algorithms are heuristics–it is key to
       empirically analyze their performance on hardware and track progress towards quantum ad-
       vantage.   To  this  extent,  we  present  ten  optimization  problem  classes  that  are  difficult  for
       existing classical algorithms and can (mostly) be linked to practically relevant applications,
       with the goal to enable systematic, fair, and comparable benchmarks for quantum optimization
       methods.  Further, we introduce the Quantum Optimization Benchmarking Library [QOBLIB]
       where the problem instances and solution track records can be found.  The individual prop-
       erties of the problem classes vary in terms of objective and variable type, coefficient ranges,
       and density.  Crucially, they all become challenging for established classical methods already
       at system sizes ranging from less than 100 to, at most, an order of 100 000 decision variables,
       allowing to approach them with today’s quantum computers.  We reference the results from
       state-of-the-art solvers for instances from all problem classes and demonstrate exemplary base-
       line results obtained with quantum solvers for selected problems. The baseline results illustrate
       a standardized form to present benchmarking solutions,  which has been designed to ensure
       comparability of the used methods, reproducibility of the respective results, and trackability of
       algorithmic and hardware improvements over time. We encourage the optimization community
       to explore the performance of available classical or quantum algorithms and hardware plat-
       forms with the benchmarking problem instances presented in this work toward demonstrating
       quantum advantage in optimization.

   ∗koch@zib.de
   †wor@zurich.ibm.com
   ‡ouf@zurich.ibm.com


                                                           1
Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                                           3

2   Related Work                                                                                                         4

3   Methods                                                                                                                 5
     3.1    Problem Types.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      5
     3.2    Modeling.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      5
     3.3    Metrics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      6

4   Problem Classes & Instances                                                                   8
     4.1    Market Split.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    12
     4.2    Low Autocorrelation Binary Sequences.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    13
     4.3    Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    15
     4.4    Steiner Tree Packing.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    18
     4.5    Sports Tournament Scheduling.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    20
     4.6    Portfolio Optimization.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    22
     4.7    Maximum Independent Set.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    26
     4.8    Network Design.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    28
     4.9    Vehicle Routing Problem.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    30
     4.10  Topology Design.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    33

5   Submission Guidelines and Illustrative Results                                        35
     5.1    Low Autocorrelation Binary Sequences.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    35
     5.2    Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    38
     5.3    Maximum Independent Set.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    41

6   Conclusion and Discussion                                                                   43

A  Building Capabilities via Instance Simplification                                             47

B  Market Split Classical Results                                                                  47

C  Market Split Instance Generation                                                       47

D  Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition
     Quantum Baseline Benchmark – Additional Details                                 47

E  Maximum Independent Set Classical Post-processing                               51





























                                                                              2
1    Introduction

Optimization is subject to extensive research due to its importance in science and industry.  Ap-
plications  include  experiment  design,  protein  folding,  logistics,  and  finance,  where  better  algo-
rithms can improve performance, accuracy, and cost efficiency.  Optimization algorithms fall into
three categories:  provably exact algorithms, provably approximate algorithms with a priori per-
formance guarantees, and heuristic algorithms without such guarantees, although posterior perfor-
mance bounds may sometimes be available.  Complexity theory classifies optimization problems as
“easy” or “difficult”, determining what types of algorithms may exist.  Many relevant optimiza-
tion problems are NP-hard,  i.e.,  the computational resources required to find provably optimal
solutions grow exponentially with the problem size.  We do not expect the existence of provably
exact efficient algorithms for such problems in general [AAA +24].  For some of them, the possi-
ble performance of provably approximate algorithms is limited by known inapproximability bounds
cf. [GW95,Kho02,KKMO07]. Here, inapproximability bounds imply that solving a problem better
than the given bound is NP-hard, i.e., as hard as solving the problem to optimality.  In practice, it
is often sufficient to find a good solution instead of a provably optimal one.  Thus, classic heuristics
and ML-based solvers are viable approaches for many problems of interest.  Since heuristics lack
a priori guarantees, rigorous benchmarking is crucial to assess the corresponding performance and
resource requirements.  To enable a fair comparison of algorithms and hardware platforms and to
guarantee reproducibility of reported results, a suitable set of problem instances and metrics needs
to be defined.  This also allows tracking progress in algorithm and hardware improvements over
time.
    Quantum computing offers a novel toolbox to approach optimization problems–see [AAA +24]
for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  quantum  optimization  algorithms,  their  challenges,  and  potential.
With recent advances in quantum hardware [KEA +23], systematic benchmarking of quantum op-
timization  algorithms  and  comparison  with  classical  solvers  have  become  feasible.   This  paper
proposes ten classes of combinatorial optimization problems, see Table1, and corresponding prob-
lem instances, which can be found in an open-source repository Quantum Optimization Benchmark
Library  [QOBLIB].  These problem classes were selected because they include instances that are
difficult for state-of-the-art classical solvers with only a hundred to a hundred thousand variables,
have diverse characteristics, and many of them have connections to industrial applications.  This
makes them suitable candidates for benchmarking and exploring the potential of quantum advan-
tage in optimization.  Further, for each class, we provide instances of varying complexity, ranging
from those already feasible for today’s quantum hardware to those challenging for state-of-the-art
classical solvers.

           Problem                 Description
           Market Split       Multi-dimensional subset-sum
           LABS           Low autocorrelation binary sequences
           Birkhoff     Minimum Birkhoff decomposition
           Steiner        Steiner tree packing in graphs (VLSI Design/Wire Routing)
           Sports              Sports tournament scheduling (STS)
           Portfolio     Multi-period portfolio optimization with transaction costs
           Independent SetUnweighted maximum independent set (MIS)
           Network            Communications network design problem
           Routing     Capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP)
           Topology       Graph topology design (Node-Degree-Diameter problem)

Table  1:   The  intractable  decathlon:   Ten  combinatorial  optimization  and  feasibility  problem  classes
that are difficult to solve with state-of-the-art solvers and can already be studied with today’s quantum
computers.  They are introduced in detail in Section4.

    Notably,  we  promote  model-independent  benchmarking,  which  allows  for  maximal  flexibility
in choosing models, algorithms, and hardware platforms.  A prerequisite for our goal is the estab-
lishment of a fair and systematic benchmarking effort to advance toward demonstrating quantum
advantage in optimization.  Given the large number of possibilities, exhaustively comparing algo-
rithms is an enormous challenge that requires the scientific community’s collective effort.
    In addition to identifying the best approach to solving a given problem, benchmarking is critical
for verifying algorithms’ correctness, identifying bottlenecks, improving existing approaches, and
tracking  progress  over  time.   This  includes  the  progress  in  algorithms,  software  libraries,  and
hardware platforms [NSB +24].  The goal, scope, and limitations of a benchmarking effort must be


                                                            3
                     clearly defined, as this determines the type of conclusions it may support.  An overview of the main
                     goals of benchmarking is presented below in the box “Goals in Benchmarking”, cf. [FRH +22] for
                     a related discussion.
                          The remainder of this work is structured as follows.  First, we discuss related work focusing on
                     quantum application benchmarking in Section2.  Then, in Section3, we present our benchmarking
                     methodology,  covering  different  modeling  approaches  and  key  metrics  to  ensure  reproducibility,
                     comparability, and trackability of results.  Afterward, Section4introduces the ten benchmarking
                     problem classes.  In addition to defining the problem, this section also provides additional back-
                     ground, such as explaining the relevance of these problems for quantum optimization benchmarking
                     and presenting classical baseline results.  To kick off this collaborative benchmarking effort, Sec-
                     tion5discusses how to contribute solutions to the open-source repository and provides illustrative
                     quantum baseline results for selected problem instances.  We conclude in Section6.

















                     2    Related Work

                     A general introduction to benchmarking can be found in [DGS18,Jai91,KBPV22,BBDvdB                                      +20,
                     MWHK11,DMBS79].  Many important classical optimization benchmarks have been established
                     via competitions and open-source libraries.  Notable examples are the Discrete Mathematics and
                     Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) implementation challenges [dim], the Satisfiability (SAT)
                     competitions [FHI +21,SAT], and the Mixed Integer Programming Library (MIPLIB) [GHG           +21].
                     Another set of optimization benchmarks is regularly conducted by Hans Mittelmann [Mit23].  Here,
                     different optimization pipelines are executed using the same computational setup.
                          Most benchmarks in quantum computing focus on the performance of individual components of
                     the quantum computing stack and their integration [PYBBK24,AAPS24,LME                                          +25]:  Randomized
                     benchmarking focuses on gate quality [MGJ +12].  The layer fidelity represents a quality metric of
                     layers of two-qubit gates [MHP +23].  Circuit Layer Operations Per Second (CLOPS) measures the
Goals in Benchmarkingspeed of a quantum computer [NSB +24,WPJA      +21].  Speed and quality of compiling quantum cir-
Applications  Benchmarking:   The  goal  is  to  find  the  best  possible  algorithms–classical  orcuits from high-level abstract representations to machine-level instructions have been investigated
quantum–to solve a given problem instance.  Thus, benchmarks must be model-independentand reported in Benchpress [NSB +24].  In addition, application-driven benchmarks have been pro-
to  allow  all  possible  approaches  to  solve  a  problem.   This  is  the  only  level  that  ultimatelyposed  as  full-stack  system  benchmarks.   They  usually  focus  on  problems  that  can  be  solved  to
allows demonstrating quantum advantage.optimality classically and track the progress of quantum computers to achieve a known optimal
                     solution [GD25,MAA21,LCM                               +24,TGO      +22,SJHE24,FRH                       +22].  While this allows tracking the
Algorithm  Benchmarking:    The  goal  is  to  identify  suitable  strategies  for  setting  hyper-progress of hardware and algorithms, it is not sufficient to demonstrate quantum advantage.
parameters,  identifying bottlenecks,  improving algorithms,  and tracking progress over time.This work presents a selected set of optimization problem instances that are difficult for state-
Since algorithm benchmarking does not entail comparing against all possible algorithms,  itof-the-art algorithms and corresponding benchmarking metrics that enable a fair and reliable com-
will not allow demonstrating quantum advantage.  Nevertheless,  it can be used to estimateparison. See [McG24b,BBS                    +24,LAZ      +25] for further discussion on the importance of appropriately
an algorithm’s scaling, which may facilitate the identification of potential asymptotic scalingchosen benchmarking metrics.  The presented set of problem instances enables investigating po-
advantages and help track progress toward quantum advantage.tential  advantages  of  novel  algorithms  and  computational  platforms.   Furthermore,  it  facilitates
                     tracking the progress towards potential quantum advantage in optimization.  This is comparable
System  Benchmarking:    The  goal  is  to  identify  the  best  way  to  run  a  fixed  algorithmto the curated set of many-body quantum systems presented in [WRV +24]–but for optimization.
for a fixed problem on a given platform.  This includes tuning algorithmic hyperparameters or
parameters of the execution environment, e.g.,  for error suppression and mitigation,  and to4
confirm that the algorithm is working as expected.  It can also be used for application-centric
hardware benchmarking.
3    Methods

In  this  section,  we  introduce  our  methodology  for  quantum  optimization  benchmarking.   More
specifically, we discuss what general problem types are considered, different ways to model them,
and metrics to measure the performance of a specific optimization workflow.

3.1    Problem Types
We consider ten classes of combinatorial optimization problems.  Schrijver [Sch03] describes com-
binatorial optimization as follows:  “Combinatorial  Optimization  searches  for  an  optimum  object
in  a  finite  collection  of  objects.   Typically,  the  collection  has  a  concise  representation,  while  the
number  of objects  is  huge–more  precisely,  it grows  exponentially  in the  size  of the  representation.
So  scanning  all  objects  one  by  one  and  selecting  the  best  one  is  not  an  option”.  There are other
classes of optimization problems for which quantum solvers have been proposed, including several
classes of polynomial-time solvable convex optimization problems; see [AAA +24] for an overview.
We focus on combinatorial optimization for the following two reasons:  First, quantum algorithms
for convex optimization usually require fault-tolerant quantum computers.  Hence, they cannot be
tested on existing quantum devices.  For combinatorial optimization, on the other hand, multiple
(heuristic)  approaches  are  known  that  can  be  implemented  and  tested  already  today.   Second,
classical  computers  excel  at  solving  convex  optimization  problems  even  at  massive  scales,  while
combinatorial optimization problems can be intractable for classical algorithms already at a rela-
tively small number of variables.  This increases the possibility that near-term quantum computers
outperform classical ones in certain cases.
    More specifically, we consider combinatorial optimization problems with n∈ N decision vari-
ables of the form
                                                  x∗ = argmin
                                                           x∈X f(x),
with feasible space X  ={x∈ Zn| g(x)≤ b, l≤ x≤ u},  where g  : Zn→ Z, b∈ Z,l,u∈ Zn,
and objective function f  : X→ Z.  It should be noted that the coefficients are (if necessary) re-
scaled and rounded to integers to mitigate potential numerical accuracy issues and to simplify the
solution.  We distinguish between  feasibility  problems  and  optimization  problems.  For feasibility
problems, we can assume f  is constant, and we are interested in finding any solution x∗∈X that
satisfies all given constraints,  or in showing that X  =∅.  For optimization problems,  we have a
non-constant objective function to be minimized or maximized, in addition to potential constraints
to be satisfied.  If an algorithm returns a solution ˆx∈X, we call the solution feasible.  If in addition,
f(ˆx) = minx∈Xf(x), we call the solution optimal.  Multiple optimal solutions may exist.
    From the theoretical side, both problem types are closely related, as we can solve optimization
problems  via  a  sequence  of  feasibility  problems  by  adding  a  constraint  for  a  certain  objective
value k,  i.e., Xk  ={x∈ X| f(x)≤ k},  and asking whether Xk  =∅.  The value of k  can then
be  iteratively  adjusted,  for  example,  using  binary  search,  until  the  optimal  value  is  found.   We
can also make the problem unconstrained,  for instance,  by removing the constraint and instead
minimizing  ¯f(x) =f(x) +M· max{0,g(x)−b}, X ={x∈ Zn|l≤x≤u} for a suitably large M,
see Section3.2for a more detailed discussion.
    In  practice,  a  good  solution  without  proof  of  optimality  or  provable  bound  on  the  approx-
imation  ratio  is  often  sufficient.   If  a  formal  guarantee  on  the  solution  quality  is  not  required,
finding a feasible solution with a good objective value is often achievable with classical heuristics,
although challenging problem instances exist.  We restrict our benchmarking study to computing
good solutions without requiring a proof of optimality.  First, because we want to assess practical
performance,  and  second,  because  most  known  quantum  optimization  algorithms  are  heuristics
and do not provide any a priori or a posteriori performance guarantees.

3.2    Modeling
Mathematical programming became a fundamental tool in many disciplines thanks to the existence
of high-performance solvers that can find good–often even optimal–solutions for large classes of
problems.  Mathematical programming provides a way to classify models according to their struc-
ture and match model families with their respective specialized algorithms.  The invention of more
advanced solvers led to a shift in how problems are modeled and solved.  As an example, the im-
pactful success of solvers for Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) resulted in many applications that
were  reformulated  into  linear  formulations  to  benefit  from  highly  performant  implementations.
Modern  MIP  solvers  can  solve–often  to  proven  optimality–Mixed  Integer  Linear  and  Quadratic


                                                             5
Programs (MILP/MIQP), as well as their pure Integer and Binary variants, ILP, IQP, BLP, and
BQP, respectively.
    The choice of problem formulation, even in the same model class, can have a tremendous im-
pact on the solvability of a problem [AKT08].  While the global optimum is typically the same
for different problem formulations1, one might be better suited for a particular problem instance
or algorithm than another.  The development of novel hardware and algorithmic devices to solve
Quadratic  Unconstrained  Binary  Optimization  (QUBO)  problems  led  to  a  renewed  interest  in
formulations  of problems as QUBO [Luc14,GKD18].  While all                           Integer  Linear  Programs  (ILP),
or  Integer  Quadratic  Programs  (IQP)  can  be  arbitrarily  approximated  by  some  QUBO,  naive
reformulations will often contain a large number of densely connected variables and will require
outstanding precision for the coefficients to accurately represent the original structure [ARCR +24].
For example, ILP can explicitly represent different constraints or variables that can be difficult to
encode into a QUBO, since many constraints can only be incorporated implicitly into QUBO via
penalty terms that vanish for feasible solutions.  In addition, to realize a QUBO representation,
integer variables must be decomposed into binary ones–a useful library to handle this conversion
can  be  found  at  [QUB25].   Direct  translation  from  a  general  ILP  to  a  QUBO  requires  making
decisions  on  hyperparameters  that  define  the encoding  and penalty  functions  [GKD18] and  can
impact the quality of a solution depending on the considered algorithm.  Furthermore, comparing
the results received from multiple formulations of a problem requires careful interpretation.  The
objective values of two QUBOs representing the same problem using different penalty factors can-
not be directly compared.  Therefore, solutions must be mapped back to the original problem to
understand and compare their performance.  Higher-level modeling languages exist that provide
additional  structure  to  accommodate  a  problem’s  original  semantics  more  naturally,  and  multi-
ple tools can automate reformulating from a high-level representation into,  for instance,  ILP or
QUBO; see, e.g., [Koc04,XRA         +23,VQG      +24].  Thus, the fact that a problem can be cast into a
certain form does not necessarily mean that, in practice, it is a good idea to solve it in that form.
Given  the  inherent  formulation  differences,  we  focus  on  model-independent  benchmarking  such
that one may find the best formulation and corresponding algorithm for a given problem instance.
Another type of reformulation allows mapping  Higher-Order  Unconstrained  Binary  Optimization
(HUBOs), which may either be solved directly [PBE24] or converted to QUBOs [ABCG17,I75].
To this extent, higher-order binary terms are broken into multiple quadratic terms by introducing
additional binary variables.  Depending on the number and degree of the higher-order terms, this
can significantly increase the number of binary variables, potentially leading to impractical prob-
lem formulations.  Some quantum optimization algorithms can handle higher-order terms natively,
giving  them  a  potential  advantage  over  those  algorithms  (quantum  and  classical)  that  cannot.
Notably, many quantum optimization algorithms are designed for QUBOs.  A common approach
is, thus, to start with a higher-level problem formulation and reformulate it as QUBO. Tutorials
on QUBO reformulations can be found, e.g., in [GKD18,XRP                  +24].

3.3    Metrics
The different possible goals of running a benchmark, as described in Section1, require different
metrics to be considered.  To ensure that benchmarking results allow for a fair comparison,  the
reported metrics must be clearly defined.  In the following, we will focus on  solution  quality  and
required  computational  resources  and  discuss  the  corresponding  metrics.   Examples  of  how  to
report benchmarking results for selected problem instances and quantum algorithms are presented
in Section5.

3.3.1    Solution Quality
The metrics for evaluating solution quality differ between feasibility and optimization problems.
A feasibility problem is completely solved as soon as a feasible solution is found.  However, proving
that  no  such  solution  exists  is  usually  significantly  more  challenging  and  impossible  for  most
heuristics.   For  optimization  problems,  the  key  metric  to  be  reported  is  the  best  objective  value
corresponding to a feasible solution  found by an algorithm.  If the algorithm also provides a lower
bound (for minimization) or an upper bound (for maximization) for the optimal objective value,
this bound can be provided as well.  To solve an optimization problem to  proven  optimality,  an
algorithm  must  first  find  an  optimal x∗∈ X  and  then  prove  that  no  better x∈ X  exists  with
f(x)<f(x∗), e.g., by providing a tight bound on the objective value.  Usually, the second step is
the more difficult one.

   1Variations may occur, for example, in relaxed, e.g., linear or semi-definite programming formulations.


                                                            6
    The  above  respective  algorithms  may  run  deterministically  or,  as  many  classical  and  most
quantum algorithms do, stochastically.  In the latter case, additional details should be reported.
Stochastic algorithms should be executed multiple times to ensure the reported results describe
the typical behavior of the algorithm.  Then, for both feasibility and optimization problems, the
number of repetitions yielding feasible solutions should be reported.  For optimization problems,
additionally,  the best objective value achieved by a feasible solution found across all repetitions
should be stated, as well as the number of successful  repetitions.  Given a number of repetitions of
a stochastic algorithm and a given tolerance ϵ≥ 0, we consider a single run successful if it finds
a feasible solution with an objective value that is ϵ-close to the best-found feasible solution across
all repetitions.  More precisely, suppose the best found solution over all repetitions, denoted by x′
with corresponding objective value f(x′), which may differ from the global optimum f(x∗).  Then,
a solution x corresponding to a successful run must satisfy f(x)≤ (1 +ϵ)f(x′) (minimization) or
f(x)≥ (1−ϵ)f(x′) (maximization)–assuming non-negative objective values.
    Notably, one may also want to track metrics that present combined information about solution
quality and the time it takes to arrive at a particular quality.  One example thereof is the  primal
integral  [Ber13],  which  tracks  the  primal  bound  towards  the  optimal  (or  best  known)  solution
throughout  the  iterations  executed  by  a  solver.   This  approach  has  been  found  to  be  suitable
for comparing the performance of solvers that do not necessarily return optimal solutions.  This
includes  machine  learning-based  optimization  solvers  [KvHW19, BMZ                     +24, BHP      +25, LLL      +24]–
trained on a large number of known instances–which can, in certain cases, predict good solutions
quickly.

3.3.2    Computational Resources
To  compare  different  methods  and  algorithms,  it  is  crucial  to  transparently  report  the  type  of
computational resources used and the duration for which they were utilized. Thus, software versions
and hardware specifications, such as the type of processing units used and the amount of memory
available, must be reported, as discussed in more detail below.
    First, the total runtime (s), i.e., the total wall-clock time for running the considered algorithm
using the reported hardware, excluding idling times, e.g., queuing for execution on a (quantum)
computer  while  the  remaining  processing  units  are  waiting.   For  stochastic  algorithms  that  are
repeated multiple times, the average total runtime over all repetitions should be reported.  If the
algorithm is parallelized and uses multiple processing units simultaneously, this should be noted in
the hardware description but not translated into a single-core runtime.  The definition of the total
runtime, excluding idling times, can be easily measured and represents the runtime most relevant
for  practical  applications.   In  certain  cases,  it  may  also  be  useful  to  report  the  time-to-solution
(TTS), i.e., the time from the algorithm’s start until the returned solution was found.
    Second, to better understand how different hardware is utilized, reported runtimes should be
split into the execution time on CPUs, GPUs, quantum computers, and alternative hardware, such
as, for instance, Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) or Ising machines.  How to accurately
define, measure, and report runtime on a quantum computer is discussed in Section3.3.3below.
    There  are  many  additional  details  of  interest,  such  as  the  intermediate  problem  sizes  after
pre-solving or the time and resources spent in different stages of the workflow:  pre-solving, pre-
processing (circuit preparation, etc.), training of machine learning-based solvers, post-processing,
etc.  While it is difficult to capture all of these details in a submission table (see Table10),  we
strongly encourage benchmark submitters to provide such details in an accompanying reference,
such as a paper or repository.

3.3.3    Measuring Quantum Computing Runtimes
In the following, we define quantum computing runtime and how to measure it on the example of the
IBM Quantum Platform [IBM,MCG24a]; see Figure1.  A quantum computer consists of multiple
stages, including a runtime environment, such as the Qiskit Runtime, the control electronics, and
the actual quantum chip.  The payload sent to a quantum computer needs to pass these stages,
and even though some steps are performed using classical computing,  such as,  e.g.,  compiling a
quantum circuit to microwave pulses, we attribute them to the runtime on the quantum computer.
Thus, we define the runtime of a single run of a quantum (sub-) routine as the total time it takes
to receive the payload,  prepare it,  run the circuit on the QPU, and extract and return samples
from the system by measuring the qubits.  We would like to highlight that the number of samples
drawn  from  a  quantum  circuit  corresponds  to  a  hyperparameter  that  has  to  be  chosen  as  part
of the considered quantum algorithm.  Furthermore, we assume that circuits are provided using a


                                                            7
topology and gate set that is natively supported by the quantum computer.  Thus, while we include
the time it takes to prepare such a circuit for execution, e.g., to microwave pulses, we explicitly
exclude the time it takes to map a given circuit to the instruction set supported by a particular
quantum computer.  This additional transpilation time should be considered during classical pre-
processing.  Similarly, we attribute time spent on error mitigation to the quantum computer, if it
happens as part of the runtime environment, and to the classical processing units, if it is handled
via post-processing.













Figure  1:   Illustration  of  a  computational  environment  that  provides  access  to  quantum  and  classical
resources.  On the left side, it shows the components of an IBM Quantum computer:  the Qiskit Runtime
environment [JATK +24], the Quantum Processing Unit (QPU), and the actual quantum chip.  The QPU
consists of the quantum chip and control electronics such as interconnects, amplifiers, and signal filtering.
The right side illustrates typical classical high-performance computational resources such as central pro-
cessing units (CPU), graphical processing units (GPU), and artificial intelligence units (AIU), e.g., tensor
processing units.  These classical resources may be employed by an algorithm in synergy with the quantum
resources to achieve the best possible result.  Credits:  IBM Quantum [GM24].

    Last,  we  outline  how  to  measure  the  quantum  computing  runtime  in  the  most  reliable  way.
When using an IBM Quantum computer, one should run quantum circuits using the Qiskit Runtime
Session-mode [JATK +24] instead of     Batch- or Job-mode.  Once a session has been started, it blocks
the whole quantum computer for a user, in contrast to batch and single-job mode, which may share
resources–such as circuit preparation pipelines–across different users and, thus, may not provide
accurate  runtime  estimates.   After  a  job  has  been  executed,  the  results  returned  from  the  IBM
Quantum Platform [IBM] contain the session start and end times, as well as the times individual
jobs were submitted, started, and completed.  In addition, the results report actual usage, which
refers to the time that was actually spent on the QPU, excluding classical pre- and post-processing
inside the quantum computer.  Due to the potential parallelization of circuit preparation pipelines
before executing them on the QPU, we cannot just add the runtimes of the individual jobs. Instead,
we take the total time the session is active, i.e., the difference between start and end time excluding
initial queuing time, and further subtract all times where the session was active but idling, i.e., while
no jobs were submitted and we were not waiting for previously submitted jobs to be completed.
This is what we define as the quantum computer runtime, while the idling time in between jobs
should be attributed to, e.g., the classical runtime.

4    Problem Classes & Instances

This section presents ten problem classes and corresponding instances that are non-trivial to solve
with state-of-the-art methods–for most of them already at relatively small scales.  Furthermore, the
respective problem classes are mostly related to practically relevant problems.  Such problems are
hard to find for two reasons:  First, unsolved problems of industrial relevance are rarely published.
Second, problems of practical relevance that cannot be solved are usually discarded and replaced
by artificial simplifications of the original problem.  This leads to a selection bias  and may be one
reason why a benchmarking framework that includes truly difficult (for reasonable system sizes)
and  relevant  (ideally  in  practical  settings)  optimization  problems  that  enable  a  meaningful  and
fair comparison of quantum and classical algorithms has not been established until now.
    Problem instances can be loosely classified into three categories, which are not always mutu-
ally exclusive:  Real-world  instances  arise from real-world problems, and are therefore crucial for
demonstrating  a  practical  quantum  advantage.   Since  there  is  already  a  demand  for  a  solution,
such instances have often been modeled (and possibly simplified) such that they can be tackled
by  existing  solvers.   The  availability  of  real-world  instances  to  the  scientific  community  is  often
limited, even more so for unsolved problems as discussed above.  Random  instances  are based on
randomly generated data, which may be motivated by real-world problems or completely artificial.


                                                             8
Depending on the generation method, such instances often do not capture the structural peculiari-
ties of a real-world setting, and may be easy or hard to solve.  Crafted instances are most likely the
best way to construct artificial examples that are hard to solve.  However, there is a risk that the
instances are of no practical relevance, as they often represent borderline pathological cases; see,
e.g., [HZ21,VGMG23].  A quantum advantage for random or crafted instances is interesting, as it
may help to identify real-world problems with similar structure.  The problem instances presented
here were mostly crafted to fit a range of criteria we identified as crucial for a useful optimization
benchmarking framework, while they are still mostly related to real-world problems.
    Problem instances can be further classified as  primal  difficult,  dual  difficult, or both.  Primal
difficulty refers to instances where it is difficult to find an optimal solution, dual difficulty refers to
instances where it is difficult to  prove  a solution is optimal.  An astonishing number of instances
are  primal  easy  but  dual  hard.   Before  solving  an  instance,  it  is  a  priori  unclear  which  is  the
case.  One may, however, gain intuition about the difficulty of a problem instance from solutions
of other instances of the same problem class, since instances within the same class often behave
similarly.  Since most currently known quantum optimization algorithms are heuristics, we consider
the chances for demonstrating a near-term quantum advantage higher for primal difficult problems
and  do  not  yet  expect  a  benefit  for  proving  optimality,  although  that  might  be  possible  later.
Hence, we mainly present problems that are considered primal difficult.  Further, if it is easy to
find a very good or even optimal solution,  the problem is not difficult from a practical point of
view, and thus, there is less potential for demonstrating practical quantum advantage.
    We applied the following criteria for the selection of the problems presented in the remainder
of  this  section.   First,  we  consider  problems  that  can  be  modeled  using  only  integer  variables,
preferably binary ones,  and all coefficients can be represented as integers.  In an all-integer set-
ting,  checking  the  feasibility  of  solutions  is  easy  and  does  not  suffer  from  issues  with  rounding
or numerical accuracy, and integer variables are more amenable for known quantum optimization
algorithms without requiring too many qubits.  Second, problem classes should contain instances
that are hard to solve for state-of-the-art classical approaches, preferably even at a relatively small
size, and preferably because of primal difficulty.  This enables testing known quantum optimization
algorithms already today.  Third, all selected instances have a feasible solution.  For those prob-
lem classes that are not genuinely feasible, we generated the instances in a way that guarantees
feasibility, as discussed in the following sections.
    Table2provides an overview of the problem classes and a summary of their key properties.
In particular, it highlights challenges that may be introduced when translating problem instances
from Integer Programming to QUBO. This includes increasing the number of variables, conversion
of sparse to dense problems, or significantly larger ranges of coefficients.  This shows the importance
of selecting the right modeling approach for a problem.
    The set of problems was selected to be diverse and can be grouped into three categories:

    •  Market Split, Maximum Independent Set, and Network Design are classic binary optimization
       problems. They have been studied intensively before the year 2000, cf. corresponding sections.
       Since then, only limited efforts have been put into improving the state-of-the-art in targeted
       exact solvers or heuristics.  We attribute this to the fact that general MIP solvers and known
       heuristics are good enough for many practically relevant settings.  However, these problem
       classes are well-established, can be effectively solved at small sizes, and become difficult to
       solve exactly for growing dimensions.  The latter is particularly true for Market Split and
       Network Design.  It follows that these problems are great candidates for testing,  tracking,
       and pushing the capabilities of quantum algorithms.

    •  LABS,  Minimum  Birkhoff  Decomposition,  Steiner  Tree  Packing,  Sports  Scheduling,  and
       Topology Design are problem classes that received limited attention compared to, e.g., Trav-
       eling Sales Person, Independent Set, or Knapsack problems.  Thus, it may be that the known
       state-of-the-art classical algorithms could still be significantly improved.  At the same time,
       quantum algorithms may offer an interesting approach to solving these types of practically rel-
       evant problems, especially because LABS and Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition are already
       difficult at very small sizes.  Steiner Tree Packing and Sports Scheduling become interesting
       at larger system sizes, but they have many practically relevant applications and, especially
       for the latter, even heuristics are struggling.

    •  Portfolio  Optimization  and  Vehicle  Routing  problems  have  obvious  practical  applications.
       Companies face diverse variations of these problems depending on industry and operational
       execution.   Hence,  there  are  indefinitely  many  variations  of  these  problems  depending  on
       individual constraints and/or objectives, resulting in problem instances of varying difficulty.


                                                             9
                               For this reason, it is difficult to define a small set of problem instances to benchmark and
                               compare established approaches, which are representative of these problem classes.  In ad-
                               dition,  many  established  solvers  from  commercial  software  vendors  are  not  accessible  for
                               open-source benchmarks.  Despite the practical relevance of these problem classes, no well-
                               established benchmark set exists for testing the progress of quantum algorithms.  We aim
                               to fill this gap by providing a selection of relevant problem instances.  However,  it should
                               be noted that all given Vehicle Routing problem instances can be solved to optimality with
                               existing methods.  This is a shortcoming that we aim to address in the future.
                            The number of decision variables for which MIP or QUBO formulations of the selected instances
                        become difficult ranges from less than 100 to 45,000, and is therefore within reach for testing algo-
                        rithms on near-term quantum hardware.  Depending on the problem, the ranges of the constraint
                        coefficients lie between 1 and≈ 107, assuming that the coefficients are scaled to integers, as we do
                        throughout the paper.  This can pose another challenge for quantum computers as they need to be
                        able to represent the problem data in the necessary resolution.
                            Figure2provides a more detailed overview of the instances provided for the various problem
                        classes,  complementing  Table2.   For  MIP  and  QUBO  formulations  of  the  considered  problem
                        instances,  it  illustrates  the  number  of  variables,  the  problem  density,  the  coefficient  range,  and
                        whether  the  optimal  solution  is  known.   Please  note  that  if  multiple  MIP  and  QUBO  models
                        are available (see [QOBLIB]), we choose to represent the one resulting in the smallest number of
                        variables. We would further like to point out that the QUBO illustration only shows those instances
                        that could be converted from an MIP model into a QUBO model with fewer than 1.6·105 variables.
                        As the plots show, the larger the number of variables, the more likely it is that we do not know
                        the optimal solution.  Finally,  it can be seen that Market Split and LABS are the two problem
                        classes for which difficult instances are found at the smallest sizes.  Independent Set also has hard
















                        Table 2:  Problem classes overview - details on illustrative MIP and QUBO formulations, as applicable.
                        Type denotes the objective/constraint type as linear (L) or quadratic (Q) for either if the problem corre-
                        sponds to an optimization problem.  For feasibility problems, the objective type is indicated as feasibility
                        (F). Dense denotes whether the model is dense (d), defined as|A|≥  14nm, where A∈ Rm×n is the con-
                        straint matrix of a MIP and n,m denote the number of variables and constraints, respectively, or sparse
                        (s),  otherwise.   For  QUBO  models,  density  is  defined  as|Q| >   18n2,  where  we  assume Q  is  an  upper-
                        triangular cost matrix (due to symmetry, and thus, the reduced pre-factor of  18  instead of  14  used for MIP).
                        Again,n denotes the number of variables.  Portfolio has a sparse constraints matrix but a dense quadratic
                        objective, which we indicate by s∗.  #Vars denotes the approximate number of decision variables of the
                        models corresponding to instances where the problems can become difficult for classical methods to solve
                        to proven optimality in MIP formulation.  Hence, the number of decision variables in the QUBO column
                        denotes the size of the QUBO formulation, where solvers struggle to solve the corresponding MIP. This
                        is to highlight how certain problems become significantly larger when represented as QUBO instead of an
                        MIP. Coeffs is the approximate coefficient range, i.e., the maximum range of all coefficients in the models.
                        Again, we can have a significant discrepancy between MIP and QUBO representations for certain classes.
                        Constr Number of different constraint types in the MIP formulation (̸= total number of constraints).  This
                        indicates the complexity of modeling the problems. Feas denotes whether it is trivial to find or construct
                        a (initial) feasible solution to the problem or not.  For QUBO, all solutions are feasible, and thus, we drop
                        the column.  Bin indicates whether all variables in the MIP problem are naturally binary or not.  This
                        is always true for QUBO and, thus, not reported.  If this is not the case, we see a discrepancy between
                        the number of variables in the MIP and the QUBO models.  For LABS, we have natural binary variables;
                        however, we receive quartic terms in the objective from adding squared quadratic equality constraints as
                        penalties that need to be decomposed into quadratic terms by adding binary variables.  QUBO instances
                        requiring  more  than  1.6· 105  variables  have  not  been  generated  due  to  computational  restrictions.   We
                        indicate this in the respective columns (-).  Further,  no values are given for Routing problems since we
                        were able to find the optimal solution for all tested instances.MIP            QUBO
Problem             Type      Dense     #Vars       Coeffs     Constr     Feas     Bin    Dense      #Vars        Coeffs
Market Split        F / L        d            78      48           1        no     yes10     d            70     ∼ 5· 106
LABS                Q / Q        s            81       4           1       yes     yes       s           820     ∼ 4· 104
Birkhoff            L / L        s          240       104          3       yes      no       d         3,480    ∼ 3· 1010
Steiner             L / L        s      423,360        3           9        no     yes       -              -        -
Sports              F / L        s        8,608        2         > 10       no      no       s       11,791     ∼ 4.5· 103
Portfolio           Q / L        s∗         690    ∼ 3· 104        2       yes     yes       d           690     ∼ 2· 109
Independent Set     L / L        s          500        1           1       yes     yes       d           500         2
Network             L / L        s        1,211       106          5       yes      no       s        46,330   ∼ 2.5· 1019
Routing             L / L        s             -       -         < 10      yes      no       s              -        -
Topology            L / Q        s        2,176        2         4− 7      yes      no       s              -        -
Figure  2:     The  figures  plot  the  problem  dimension  (MIP: √#variables· #constraints,   QUBO:
#variables)  against  the  density  ,  i.e.,  the  fraction  of  non-zero  coefficients  in  the  objective  and,  for  the
MIP instances, constraint functions, of the various problem instances provided in the [QOBLIB] reposi-
tory for MIP (top) and QUBO (bottom) formulations of the problem.  The legend entries for the various
problem classes name the class itself and, in brackets, give the form of the (objective/constraint) function
with L and Q denoting linear and quadratic, respectively.  Furthermore, the size of the individual points is
directly related to the coefficient range of the respective problem instance per problem class–see legend in
the center right.  The dashed lines illustrate the separation between sparse and dense instances as described
in Table2.  Finally, the inset plots illustrate the instances in which the optimal solution is known.  It should
be noted that while the MIP plot shows all problem instances, the QUBO plot only shows those instances
that we could transform into QUBO models with less than 1.6· 105 variables, cf. Table2.  The respective
model translation is done for Birkhoff, Steiner, Sports, Network, Routing, and Topology with Qiskit Opti-
mization 0.6.1 [Qis] using the default parameters.  Marketsplit, LABS, Portfolio, and Independent Set can
be trivially converted to QUBOs using ZIMPL 3.6.1 [Koc04], since there are no slack variables to consider.
Note that for Portfolio, this shows the density of the constraints matrix; the quadratic objective is always
dense.


instances at relatively small sizes; these instances are also sparse and come with a small coefficient
range.   For  these  reasons,  these  three  problem  classes  seem  the  most  amenable  for  approaching
with a quantum algorithm on near-term hardware.
    In the remainder of this section, we discuss each problem class, describe the specific instances
included, and present baseline results computed with classical optimization solvers.  Of course, all
instances, used models, and solutions are also made accessible in the [QOBLIB] repository.  We do
not claim that our baseline results are the best solutions one can find with a classical computer, but
they should provide an indication of what is possible using general solvers without extensive effort.
Moreover, the provided MIP and QUBO formulations were not subject to significant optimization
efforts but are intended to serve as illustrations.  Our goal is to provide a framework to track the
progress towards quantum advantage in optimization and have an initial baseline to start with.
To build-up expertise and start tracking today’s capabilities, we describe an informed approach to
construct warm-up examples from the provided problem instances in AppendixA.


                                                               11
                     4.1    Market Split
                     4.1.1    Background
                     The market split instances are multi-dimensional subset-sum problems, which were explicitly de-
                     signed to be hard to solve using classical methods.  Since their introduction by [GC99] in 1999, the
                     progress in solving them has been moderate.  Subset-sum is a classic NP-hard problem [GJ79].  The
                     time complexity for enumeration isO(2n/2· (n/4)) [SS81].  Several other methods have been tried,
                     including smart enumeration, branch-and-cut, and lattice point enumeration with basis reduction
                     [ABH +00,Was02,Vog12].












                     4.1.2    Problem statement
                     Given a matrixA∈ Nm×n and a right-hand sideb∈ Nm, form,n∈ N, we want to findx∈{0, 1}n
                     such that
                                                                              Ax =b.                                                                  (1)
                     This  is  a  multi-dimensional  subset-sum  problem.   We  can  transform  Eq.  (1)  trivially  into  unre-
                     stricted optimization problems:

                                                      minx∈{0,1}n (b−Ax)2        or           minx∈{0,1}n∥b−Ax∥∞,

                     where a feasible solution exists if the global minimum is zero.  With careful choices of the coeffi-
                     cients, this problem becomes hard to solve, e.g., for numbers m∈ N+, D∈ N, set n = 10(m− 1),jPk
                     I ={1,...m},J ={1,...,n} and aij∈{0,...,D− 1},bi =                            1              [GC99].
                                                                                                   2    j∈Jaij
                          The best results so far have been achieved using forms of lattice enumeration with basis reduc-
                     tion.  [Was02,Was25] report solutions to selected instances up to       m = 14.  Traditional branch-and-
                     cut-based MIP solvers often already struggle before size m≥ 7.  However, they are typically more
                     effective on the lattice reformulation introduced in [ABH +00].

                     4.1.3    Instances
                     For  this  benchmark,  we  generated  four  random  instances  each  for m  ={3,..., 15},  and D  =
                     {50, 100, 200}  as  described  above.   While  not  all  procedures  to  generate  Market  Split  instances
                     result in feasible problems (e.g., [GC99], see the study in [ABH              +00]), we generated them such that
                     feasibility is guaranteed.  For m≤ 7, we randomly generate problem instances and only include
                     them if a MIP solver can find a feasible solution.  For m > 7, we start with randomly generated
                     feasible solutions and then generate problem instances that have that point as a solution, while
                     resembling the characteristics of the instances in [GC99]; details are given in AppendixC. In our
                     tests,  the resulting instances are still hard for classical solvers.  Finally,  we provide a routine in
                     [QOBLIB] that, given an instance and a vector       x∈{0, 1}n, checks the feasibility of the vector.

                     4.1.4    Classical Baseline
                     We provide modeling examples for an integer linear program and a QUBO, which can be run with
                     any MIP or QUBO solver.  For the ILP, we use the constrained formulation with positive slack,
                     minimizing the slack as objective.  For the QUBO, we add all constraints as quadratic penalties to
                     the objective.  Figure21in the Appendix depicts detailed runtimes by Gurobi 11.0.0 [gur25] and
                     ABS2 [NTI +23] for instances with 3 ≤m≤ 7.
                          Enumeration methods, either Lattice-based according to [Was02], or Schroeppel-Shamir [SS81],
Why is it interesting?show better performance and allow solving all instances up to sizem = 11 and partly up tom = 14.
                     Figure3depicts a comparison of the runtimes of the algorithm from [Was25] on an Intel Xeon
Market split problems are a type of multi-dimensional subset-sum problem.  This problem classE-2288G CPU @ 3.70 GHz and the GPU-accelerated Schroeppel-Shamir algorithm [KK25] on an
contains various instances for which it is challenging to find feasible solutions with classicalNvidia  GH200  system.   Note  that  both  methods  are  capable  of  computing  all  solutions  to  an
digital systems–already for small system sizes, with little more than 100 variables. Applications
of  the  market  split  problem  could  be  interesting  in  various  industries,  such  as  the  energy12
sector, e.g., to help derive optimal pricing strategies subject to customer acquisition, retention
or competition constraints, and regional regulatory policies [GMS +16,FHK      +21].
                      instance.   The  time  needed  to  find  the  “first”  solution,  however,  varies  easily  by  a  factor  of  10
                      between the instances.























                      Figure  3:   (Market  Split)   Comparison  of  runtimes  using  a  lattice  enumeration  method  and  a  GPU-
                      accelerated  Schroeppel-Shamir  algorithm.   The  colors  represent  parameter m  and  the  shapes  represent
                      parameter D.


                      4.2    Low Autocorrelation Binary Sequences
                      4.2.1    Background










                          Low Autocorrelation Binary Sequences (LABS) were initially studied in the context of radar
                      and sonar system design, where achieving minimal autocorrelation sidelobes is crucial for improving
                      range resolution and target discrimination [Boe67,Sch70].  Over time, these sequences have also
                      proven useful in digital communications, coding theory, and spread-spectrum systems, where low
                      autocorrelation  properties  can  enhance  channel  efficiency  and  signal  clarity.   Unlike  many  hard
                      optimization problems, each sequence lengthN in LABS defines a single, unique problem instance.
                      As a result, progress on LABS is easy to measure:  pushing beyond known solutions or improving
                      run-time for larger N  directly reflects meaningful advances in algorithmic capability.
                          LABS  also  appear  as  ground  states  of  the  Bernasconi  model  in  statistical  physics,  a  system
                      involving  complex,  long-range  four-body  spin  interactions  [MB98].   Despite  significant  research
                      efforts,  finding  optimal  LABS  remains  a  challenging  task.   LABS  instances  can  be  solved  using
                      convex-relaxation-based branch-and-bound,  see,  e.g.,  [ELL21].  In this line of research,  LABS is
                      formulated as a polynomial optimization problem over 0-1 variables and solved using branch-and-
                      cut  techniques.   Both  off-the-shelf  solvers  and  specialized  solvers  can  be  used  to  deal  with  the
                      corresponding formulation, but the exact solution of large instances remains difficult; see [ELL21]
                      as well as the benchmark results (with optimality gaps) in [min24].  For convex-relaxation-based
                      branch-and-bound, the empirical performance on LABS instances varies greatly, and it is difficult
                      to  estimate.   The  empirically-estimated  running  time  of  a  tailored  classical  branch-and-bound
                      method that uses combinatorial bounds [PM16] is approximately 1   .73N, while the best performing
                      heuristic  discussed  in  the  literature  for  this  problem  (Memetic  Tabu  Search)  has  an  estimated
                      running time of approximately 1.34N; see [SLC +24] and the references therein for a discussion of
                      these running times and [ZSKP25] for recent results.  The work presented in [SLC                   +24] also shows
Why is it interesting?an empirical study, extrapolating from results on smaller instances, estimating the complexity of
                      quantum optimization approaches, particularly those based on QAOA combined with amplitude
Established classical algorithms struggle to find (good) solutions to LABS instances even atamplification,  to  be  around  1.21N,  considering  idealized  conditions.   Although  these  figures  are
relatively  small  sizes.   Moreover,  the  binary  (spin-like)  structure  of  LABS  aligns  naturally
with Ising-type models, making it a suitable test case for quantum optimization techniques.13
Demonstrating  improvements  in  scalability  or  solution  quality  on  LABS  would  represent  a
significant step in addressing a known hard problem.
estimates for exponential-time algorithms, which are notoriously difficult to estimate correctly on
unseen instances, they raise the possibility that quantum approaches could eventually outperform
the fastest known classical algorithms.

4.2.2    Problem Statement
Given a sequence S = (s1,...,sn) of length n with binary variables sj∈{−1, +1}, the minimum
energy autocorrelations of the sequence j∈{0,...,n− 1} corresponds to

                                                       n−1X  n−jX         !2
                                              min                 sisi+j      .
                                          s∈{−1,+1}n   j=1    i=1

As LABS is an unconstrained problem, any sequence S is a feasible solution.

4.2.3    Instances
Since there is exactly one instance per size n, all instances can easily be generated.  We provide
a checking routine that, given a sequence S, computes the autocorrelation energy and checks the
result against known optima.

4.2.4    Classical Baseline
























Figure 4:  (LABS) Solution times using Gurobi and ABS2 for different LABS sequence lengths.  Abs. gap
denotes  (the  upper  bound  on)  the  absolute  gap  to  the  optimal  (Gurobi)/best-known  (ABS2)  solution.
Only gaps > 0 are shown.

    Currently, the best-known exact solutions are limited ton = 66 andn = 127 for skew-symmetric
variants; see [PM16].  We provide an example where LABS is modeled as a binary quadratically
constrained  quadratic  program  (BQCQP),  which  can  be  fed  to  a  variety  of  established  solvers.
Figure4shows results obtained with Gurobi 11.0.0 on an AMD EPYC-7542 32-core processor using
64 threads and a time limit of 2 hours (we report the upper bound on the absolute optimality gap
if optimality is not certified), and the results of ABS2 running on a system with two Nvidia A100
SXM4 80GB GPUs using a time limit of 10 minutes (we report the absolute gap to the best found
solution).  The largest instance that could be solved to optimality using this approach–although
exceeding the usually set time limit–was n = 41.  The respective execution time was 13 hours on
a 72-core Nvidia GH200 system using Gurobi 11.0.2.  An optimal solution was found in 6 hours
and 47 minutes; the remaining time was used to prove optimality.  Note that problem sizes up to
n  =  19  can  be  solved  in  less  than  one  second  and  up  to n  =  25  in  less  than  one  minute.   The
optimal computed sequences are shown in Table3.







                                                           14
                                Length    Sequence          Obj                                Length    Sequence                            Obj
                                        2    2                           1                            22    11111212723                         39
                                        3    12                         1                             23    231131121413                       47
                                        4    112                       2                              24    122121111732                       36
                                        5    113                       2                              25    122121111733                       36
                                        6    1113                     7                               26    3371111212211                     45
                                        7    1123                     3                               27    34313131211211                   37
                                        8    1124                     8                               28    112112131313431                  50
                                        9    121113                12                                 29    112212111117323                  62
                                      10    111124                13                                  30    132311111212164                  59
                                      11    331211                  5                                 31    1112111122122337                67
                                      12    111522                10                                  32    71112111133221221              64
                                      13    5221111                6                                  33    742112111111122221            64
                                      14    41112221            19                                    34    22229421121111111              65
                                      15    11213133            15                                    35    11111132326612121              73
                                      16    2112113131         24                                     36    1121112121311132363          82
                                      17    11312144            32                                    37    22228421121121111111         86
                                      18    1112115222         25                                     38    1222211111112112448          87
                                      19    4111142212         29                                     39    11111112343212112128         99
                                      20    11114142122       26                                      40    44412112131121313131       108
                                      21    27221111121       26                                      41    343111111222281211211     108

                      Table  3:   (LABS)  Optimal  solutions  obtained  by  Gurobi  where  each  sequence  encodes  the  counts  of
                      consecutive identical tokens in the corresponding solution.  The counts are listed in order–reflecting the
                      length of each uninterrupted group of the same token.

                      4.3    Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition
                      4.3.1    Background
                      The  minimum  Birkhoff  decomposition  problem  is  a  special  case  of  the  Birkhoff  decomposition
                      problem [DU16].  In 1946, Birkhoff showed that any     n×n doubly stochastic matrix can be written
                      as a convex combination of permutation matrices [Bir46].  The method of proof used by Birkhoff
                      inspired a class of algorithms for decomposing doubly stochastic matrices known as the  Birkhoff
                      algorithm  [Bru82a, pp. 192], which can decompose a doubly stochastic matrix with at most (     n−
                      1)2 + 1 permutation matrices [MR59].  It is possible to obtain tighter upper bounds on the number
                      of permutations required depending on the number of zeros in the doubly stochastic matrix (see,
                      e.g.,  [Bru82b]);  however,  the  lower  bound,  i.e.,  the  minimum  number  of  permutation  matrices
                      required, is generally not known.  In [DU16], Dufoss´e and U¸car showed that the problem of finding
                      the  minimum  Birkhoff  decomposition  is NP-hard  despite  the  existence  of  algorithms  that  can
                      obtain  approximate  decomposition  where  the  error  decreases  exponentially  with  the  number  of
                      permutations in the decomposition [KLS17].














                           Decomposing doubly stochastic matrices has applications in assignment problems,  especially
Why is it interesting?in networking [CCH00,YZLH17,LML                                    +15,TZX      +21,BVAV16].  In those problems, a permutation
                      matrix  corresponds  to  a  matching  in  a  bipartite  graph,  which  represents  a  schedule  or  system
The problem of finding the minimum Birkhoff decomposition is NP-hard [DU16configuration used to exchange some resource (e.g., data packets, energy).  The weight associated],  and it is
hard to solve in practice, even for small instances.  Also, it is easy to craft problem instanceswith a permutation matrix captures the time the system will spend in such a configuration.  Sparse
and  obtain  non-trivial  upper  bounds  on  the  optimal  cost,  which  is  generally  challenging  indecompositions are important to reduce the time a system spends switching between configurations,
NP-hard problems.  Another interesting aspect is that the problem of decomposing doublywhich is non-negligible in practice.  Studying this problem can also be of interest for more general
stochastic matrices is well-studied, and many mathematical formulations and algorithms exist,
including MIP and convex optimization.  We also note that doubly stochastic matrices have15
a natural representation in terms of unitaries [MAT +24], which are the backbone of quantum
computation.
graph scheduling problems where the underlying graph is not just bipartite, e.g., in peer-to-peer
networks [OFCCBM23].
    The algorithms for solving the (minimum) Birkhoff decomposition methods can be divided into
three classes.  Branch-and-bound algorithms for solving a MINLP [HTBP22],  Frank-Wolfe algo-
rithms [CP23,Jag13], and variants of the Birkhoff algorithms [LML                           +15,VIT21].  Each approach
has  different  characteristics.   Branch-and-bound  algorithms  are  often  the  slowest  ones  but  can
obtain certifiable optimal solutions when the doubly stochastic matrices are not too large or too
dense.  In contrast, FW algorithms are very fast and can obtain coarse approximations with just
a few iterations.  However, they are often unable to obtain exact decompositions even when the
number of permutations used exceeds (n−1)2 +1.  Birkhoff-type algorithms take an approach that
can be considered between FW and branch-and-bound methods:  they can obtain exact decompo-
sitions with at most (n− 1)2 + 1 permutations, and their speed is comparable to FW algorithms.
Unlike branch-and-bound, Birkhoff-type algorithms do not guarantee that the solution obtained is
optimal.

4.3.2    Problem statement
LetD be ann×n doubly stochastic matrix andPi thei-thn×n permutation matrix,i∈{1,...,n!}.
Recall that a matrix is doubly stochastic if its entries are non-negative and the rows and columns
sum to one.  Similarly, a permutation matrix is a doubly stochastic matrix with binary entries.
    For a given doubly stochatic matrix D, the minimum Birkhoff decomposition  problem is:

                                            minci∈[0,s]    Pn!
                                                              i=1|ci|0
                                           subject to  sD =Pn!Pn!    i=1ciPi     ,

                                                              i=1ci =s
where we define 00 = 0, i.e.,|ci|0 counts the number of non-zero entries, ands> 0 is a scalar, often
equal to one.  The goal is to find a subset of permutation matrices such that D  is in its convex
hull and that this subset contains as few permutation matrices as possible.  The following is an
example of a decomposition of a 3× 3 matrix:
                 0.2    0.3    0.5          0    1    0         1    0    0        0    1    0
                 0.6    0.2    0.2 = 0.20    0    1 + 0.2       0    1    0 + 0.1  1    0    0                    (2)
                   0.2    0.5    0.3          1    0    0         0    0    1         0    0    1
                                              0    0    1 + 0.0   0    0    1 + 0.01    0    0.
                                       + 0.5    1    0    0           0    1    0           0    0    1
                                                0    1    0           1    0    0           0    1    0

Note thatPn!i=1|ci|0 = 4 in the example above since the decomposition only uses four out of the
3! = 6 possible permutation matrices.

4.3.3    Instances
The instance set consists of doubly stochastic matrices of sizen∈{3,..., 16} generated by sampling
n  (sparse)  and n2  (dense)  permutations  uniformly  at  random.   There  are  10  instances  for  each
matrix size and density.  The weight associated with each permutation is also sampled uniformly
at random with a fixed number of digits after the decimal points.  The number of digits after the
point depends on the size of the doubly stochastic matrix.  We then scaled all coefficients to make
them  integers.   See  [QOBLIB]  for  a  detailed  description  of  how  doubly  stochastic  matrices  are
generated.  By construction, sparse doubly stochastic matrices can be decomposed with at most
n permutations, which is a non-trivial upper bound on the minimal decomposition compared to
the upper bound (n− 1)2 + 1 that applies to all doubly stochastic matrices.  It should be noted
that the instances were generated from feasible solutions to guarantee the feasibility of all given
problem instances.  However, it is not known whether these feasible solutions are optimal.

4.3.4    Classical Baseline
The  goal  of  this  section  is  to  illustrate  the  performance  and  limitations  of  different  approaches
to  set  a  performance  baseline  with  state-of-the-art  classical  solvers  for  the  minimum  Birkhoff
decomposition problem instances.  We compare two convex optimization algorithms, Blended FW
[BPTW19,Fra] and Birkhoff+ [VIT21,Bir], as well as CPLEX.


                                                            16
Figure 5:  (Birkhoff)  Illustration of the number of permutations required to decompose sparse (left) and
dense (right) doubly stochastic matrices for varying matrix size.  The shaded area–which is only visible
in  the  sparse  case–presents  the  maximum  and  minimum  required  number  of  permutation  matrices  per
problem size.


    First, we focus on the two convex optimization algorithms devised to obtain sparse approximate
decompositions,  i.e.,  not  a  minimal  and  exact  decomposition.   Notably,  classical  heuristics  are
discussed for this problem because we also investigate quantum heuristics in Section5.2. We run the
algorithms with their out-of-the-box settings [Fra,Bir] and show the results in Figure5. The shaded
area in Figure5(only visible in the sparse case) indicates the maximum and minimum number
of permutation matrices required for a given problem size, i.e., the best and worst case instance.
The  ‘known  solution’  corresponds  to  the  number  of  permutation  matrices  used  to  generate  the
doubly stochastic matrix in the dataset, which is an upper bound to the minimum decomposition.
Observe  from  the  figure  that  Birkhoff+  obtains  better  performance  than  Blended  FW  in  both
cases.  The reason for that is that Birhoff+ is guaranteed to obtain an exact decomposition with at
most (n− 1)2 + 1 permutations, whereas Blended FW does not have such a property, even though
it  can  reduce  the  approximation  error  exponentially  fast  with  the  number  of  permutations  this
adds to the decomposition.  In the experiments, we limit the maximum number of permutations of
Blended FW to (n−1)2 +1 and observe decomposition errors in between 10−2 and 10−6 depending
on the instance.  With Birkhoff+, all the decompositions are exact, and their performance varies
depending on whether the matrix to decompose is sparse or dense.  In the sparse case, Birkhoff+
obtains decompositions that match the number of permutations used to generate the matrices (i.e.,
n) when n≤ 8.  For n≥ 9, the number of permutations required varies significantly depending on
the instance (shaded area), especially in the rangen∈ [9, 12].  Finally, in the dense case, we obtain
that  the  number  of  permutations  obtained  is  smaller  than  the  number  of  permutations  used  to
generate the doubly stochastic matrix (i.e.,n2).  There is no significant variability across instances,
and the number of matrices required by Birkhoff+ to obtain an exact decomposition scales linearly
up to the problem sizes investigated in this analysis.
    Next,  we  illustrate  the  performance  of  CPLEX  when  solving  the  following  Integer  program
(IP):  minci,PiPki=1|ci|0  s.t. sD  = Pki=1ciPi, Pki=1ci  = s, ci ∈{0, 1,...,s}, Pi ∈{0, 1}n×n,
Pi1 = PTi  1 = 1 for all i∈{1,...,k} where 1 is the all-ones vector, and s and k integers.  Note
that the permutation matrices are formulated as decision variables, and all decision variables are
represented by integers.  Also,  note that when the entries of D  have a fixed number of decimal
points (see Section4.3.3), we can always select         s to be an integer and make sD an integer-valuedh 2 3 5i
matrix.  For example, if we multiply Eq. (2) by 10, we obtain                     6 2 2  , which we can decompose
                                                                                  2 5 3
with weights 2, 2, 1, and 5.  Parameter k  in the formulation controls the decomposition length–
which is ideally as small as possible.  Thus, to solve the problem, we start the optimization with
k = 1 and increase k by one if CPLEX fails to return a feasible solution.  Figure6illustrates the
runtime of CPLEX as a function of the matrix size.  One can see from the figure that the runtime
increases rapidly in both cases.  With CPLEX on a laptop (M1 Max CPU and 32 GB memory)
and a one-hour runtime limit, we can only solve instances up to n = 4 when the matrix is dense
and up to n = 8 when the matrix is sparse.





                                                            17
                     Figure  6:   (Birkhoff)  Arithmetic  mean  of  time  required  by  CPLEX  to  decompose  a  doubly  stochastic
                     matrix with the minimum number of permutation matrices.  The x-axis indicates the size of the doubly
                     stochastic matrix, and the shaded area indicates the minimum and maximum time required to decompose
                     an instance of such size.

                     4.4    Steiner Tree Packing
                     4.4.1    Background
                     The Steiner Tree Packing Problem (STPP) describes the problem of placing n individual Steiner
                     Trees node-disjointly into a graph. Forn = 1 this is the Steiner tree problem, i.e., the combinatorial
                     variant of the much older Euclidean Steiner problem.  The Euclidean Steiner problem asks for the
                     minimal tree that connects a given set of points in the plane:  the special case with three points
                     was discussed by Fermat before 1640, whereas the general version may have originated from Gauss;
                     see [Aro96].  The Steiner tree problem replaces points with vertices in a graph with given edges
                     and weights, and we are asked to find a minimum cost tree that connects a given set of terminals
                     [Hak71,Lev71].  There is abundant literature on the Steiner Tree problem, which is already                    NP-
                     hard: we refer to [Pol03,Lju21] for two excellent overviews, containing an extensive list of references
                     and to [RK23] regarding the current state-of-the-art in solving them.
                         STPP provides a natural mathematical optimization formulation for Very Large Scale Integra-
                     tion (VLSI) design [GMW97,HKRV11].  Therefore, its efficient solution has tremendous practical
                     interest.  Early work on the STPP included polyhedral studies [GMW96a], separation routines for
                     valid inequalities [GMW96b], and approximation algorithms [JMS03].  For a more recent discussion
                     of computational results on difficult STPP instances, see [HK12].














                     4.4.2    Problem statement
                     For n∈ N+,  we write [n] ={1,...,n}.  In the STPP, we are given an undirected simple graph
                     G  =  (V,E),  and n ∈  N+  disjunct  terminal  sets T1,...,Tn  with Ti ⊆ V   for  all i ∈  [n]  and
                     Ti∩Tj =∅ fori,j∈ [n],i̸=j.  The goal is to find an edge set S∗⊆E of minimal cardinality such
                     that (V (S∗),S∗) is a forest, whereSi∈[n]Ti⊆ V (S∗) and no vertex from Ti  is connected to any
                     vertex of Tj  for all i̸=j.  The general STPP with n> 1, as defined above, requires the inclusion
Why is it interesting?of several disjoint Steiner trees into the same graph.  A solution is a forest, and each terminal set
                     Ti is connected by a single tree in the forest.
The minimization problem underlying the Steiner Tree Packing Problem comes with a linear
objective function; the density is relatively sparse, the coefficients are all one, and the decision
variables are binary. Computing optimal solutions, especially for dense routing areas, proved to
be very hard, and little progress–apart from improvements in hardware and general solvers–
has  been  achieved  in  the  last  two  decades.   This  problem  is  also  notoriously  difficult  for
heuristics since, in a dense solution, one wrong decision can render the problem infeasible.  In18
practice, this problem class can be used to model network design problems while considering
cost minimization and reliability constraints.
Figure 7:  (Steiner)  Representation of Steiner tree packing instance of size 20×20×2 with the correspond-
ing optimal solution, packing 8 Steiner trees, each one depicted in a different color.  Here, for visualization
purposes, we invert the z axis compared with the usual convention, i.e., we put terminals in the bottom
layer.


4.4.3    Instances
We generated 3-dimensional S×S×L grid graphs with holes.  All terminals are placed at the
border of the top layer.  We require all trees to be node-disjoint.  The parameters for each problem
are the size of the grid graph S, the number of layers L, the maximum number of terminals per
terminal set T , and the number of holes in the grid H.  The holes can extend to multiple layers.
An example of a 20× 20× 2 instance with the corresponding optimal solution is given in Figure7.
In practice, the problem can also be defined with edge weights.  For example, changing from one
layer to another could be more expensive.  However, since this does not make the problem more
difficult in general,  we kept it simple and set all edge weights to one.  To ensure feasibility,  the
instances were reverse-engineered from feasible solutions, which may not be optimal.  We observed
that Gurobi started having difficulties with instances of size larger than S = 20.
    Finally, we provide a program that checks if a given solution to the STPP is feasible for a given
instance, i.e., that each network’s terminals are connected by a Steiner Tree that is node-disjoint
from all other Steiner Trees.












Figure 8:  (Steiner) Total runtime and gap to the best-known (or even provably optimal) solution, solved
with Gurobi for different size 20 instances with a timeout of 72000s (left) and different size 30 instances
with a timeout of 86400s (right).  The ticked line represents the timeout, the crosses indicate the runtime,
and the stars show the gap.



#  Instance (size 20)         Sol.  Bd.  Gap      Time               #  Instance (size 30)         Sol.  Bd.  Gap      Time
 1  stp  s020  l2 t3  h2  rs24098    228   228   0.00    4852.66     14  stp  s030  l2 t3  h1  rs97531   389   388   0.26              –
 2  stp  s020  l2 t3  h3  sd97531   219   219   0.00      231.00     15  stp  s030  l2 t3  h3  rs97531   388   388   0.00  37495.02
 3  stp  s020  l2 t4  h0  rs24098    242   242   0.00    2292.39     16  stp  s030  l2 t4  h2  rs97531   387   383   1.03              –
 4  stp  s020  l3 t3  h2  rs24098    355   352   0.85              – 17  stp  s030  l2 t5  h1  rs24098   430   426   0.93              –
 5  stp  s020  l3 t4  h0  rs24098    230   230   0.00  47150.22      18  stp  s030  l3 t3  h1  rs97531   327   327   0.00  11652.86
 6  stp  s020  l3 t4  h2  rs97531    163   163   0.00      109.33    19  stp  s030  l3 t3  h2  rs97531   343   341   0.58              –
 7  stp  s020  l3 t4  h3  rs97531    217   217   0.00    1286.76     20  stp  s030  l3 t4  h0  rs97531   439   434   1.14              –
 8  stp  s020  l4 t3  h3  rs97531    268   268   0.00    1692.55     21  stp  s030  l3 t5  h1  rs24098   476   467   1.89              –
 9  stp  s020  l4 t4  h0  rs24098    281   281   0.00    4543.95     22  stp  s030  l4 t3  h1  rs97531   328   325   0.91              –
10  stp  s020  l4 t4  h3  rs37235    189   189   0.00    1005.19     23  stp  s030  l4 t4  h0  rs97531   429   423   1.40              –
11  stp  s020  l5 t3  h3  rs24098    284   282   0.70              – 24  stp  s030  l4 t4  h2  rs97531   424   418   1.42              –
12  stp  s020  l5 t4  h0  rs24098    281   281   0.00    6973.54     25  stp  s030  l5 t3  h1  rs97531   320   318   0.63              –
13  stp  s020  l5 t4  h3  rs24098    333   325   2.40              – 26  stp  s030  l5 t4  h0  rs24098   447   443   0.89              –

Table 4:  (Steiner) Results for instances of size 20 (left) and 30 (right).  Sol.  is the best solution objective
found, and Bd.  is the best lower bound found.  Gap is the gap to the optimal solution, and Time is the
total runtime in seconds, where – indicates a timeout (20 hours for size 20, 24 hours for size 30).



                                                                  19
                                   4.4.4    Classical Baseline
                                   Using the multicommodity flow ILP formulation for the node-disjoint STPP given in [HK12], we
                                   ran Gurobi 11.0.2 on an AMD EPYC-7513 32-core processor with 64 threads to attempt to solve
                                   the  smallest  instances  in  our  benchmark  set  (gridsize  20  or  30).   We  used  the  model  “as  is”,
                                   without additional valid inequalities or decomposition strategies (the model is also provided in the
                                   repository  [QOBLIB]).  Hardware  information  and  results  are  summarized  in  Figure8,  whereas
                                   solution values and bounds are given in Table4.  With this ILP model,  we could solve most of
                                   the size 20 instances (with an average solution time of 53 minutes) within 20 hours, but only two
                                   of the size 30 instances within 24 hours (the solution times were 194 minutes and 624 minutes).
                                   Reimplementing  the  techniques  of  [HK12]  using  current  solver  technology,  one  may  be  able  to
                                   solve a few more instances, but the largest grid sizes in the benchmark set remain out of reach for
                                   current exact methods.

                                   4.5    Sports Tournament Scheduling
                                   4.5.1    Background











                                        The design of algorithms to construct sports timetables goes back to at least the 1950s (see, e.g.,
                                   [Fre56]).  Particularly well researched are so-called single round-robin sports timetables where each
                                   team plays every other team once.  Even though a single round-robin timetable can be constructed
                                   in time polynomial in the number of teams (see, e.g., [dW81]), the problem becomes          NP-hard as
                                   soon as some elementary constraints are added (see, e.g., [BDS10]).  One of the prime difficulties
                                   in  sports  timetabling  is  the  vast  size  of  the  solution  space:  every  single  round-robin  timetable
                                   corresponds to an (oriented) 1-factorization of Kn  and the other way around (see Fig.9), where
                                   Kn  denotes  the  complete  graph  on n  nodes.   Considering  just  14  teams  and  even  ignoring  the
                                   order of rounds, the permutation of team names, and the home-away status of games, more than
                                   1,132,835,421,602,062,347 unique, corresponding timetables already exist [K  ¨O09].



                                                                                                         S1     S2     S3     S4     S5
                                                                                                         1-2    1-3    1-4    5-1    6-1
                                                                                                         3-5    4-5    2-3    2-4    2-5
                                                                                                         4-6    6-2    5-6    3-6    3-4



                                   Figure 9:  Oriented one-factorization of K6 (left) and its associated single round-robin timetable (right),
                                   where each i−j represents a home game of team i against team j for time slots 1 to 5.

                                        Numerous IP-based methods have previously been proposed to construct sports timetables. See,
                                   e.g., [vHLS23] for a discussion on IP formulations, [NT98] for a popular decomposition approach
                                   known as first-break-then-schedule, and [VBG23a] for an application of Benders’ decomposition.
                                        At the same time, several QUBO-inspired algorithms have been proposed for a related sports
                                   tournament problem known as the break-minimization problem.  In this problem, the objective is
                                   to minimize the overall number of breaks (i.e., consecutive games at home or away), given that the
                                   pairing of opponents is fixed in each round (e.g., [FM23,KKN22,UYS18]).

             Why is it interesting?4.5.2    Problem statement
          1                        Given a set of teams T  ={1,...,n} and time slots S ={1,..., 2(n− 1)}, n even, a double round
             As soon as any side constraints are considered, the complex combinatorial structure makes itrobin (2RR) corresponds to a perfect matching of teams in each time slot such that over all time
6            very difficult for established heuristic methods to find feasible solutions.  For several medium-2
             sized  instances,  no  known  (and  investigated)  method  was  able  to  find  any  feasible  solution
             [VG23,BGC           +23]–despite the fact that the generation process ensures the existence of feasi-20
5            ble solutions.  Furthermore,  the problem is well aligned with real-world applications,  which3
             typically ‘only’ differ in terms of a few additional side constraints.
          4
slots each team plays precisely once at home against every other team.  We call a 2RR ‘phased’ if
each team meets every other team exactly once during the first and last n− 1 time slots.
    The feasibility version of the ITC2021 sports scheduling problem considered in this benchmark
is to find a phased 2RR that additionally respects the following hard constraints:

    •  Capacity constraints.  Regulate when teams can play home or away.

          –  CA1:  team i∈T  plays at least or no more than k home games in time slots P⊆S;
          –  CA2:  same as CA1 but considering opponents as well;
          –  CA3:  no more than two consecutive home or two consecutive away games;
          –  CA4: teams inT1⊆T play no more thank home games against teams inT2⊆T during
             time slots in P⊆S.

    •  Break constraints.  A team has a break if it plays consecutively at home or away.

          –  BR1:  team i∈T  has no more than k breaks during time slots in P⊆S;
          –  BR2:  no more than k breaks in total.
    •  Game constraints.  Forbid some games during specific time slots.

          –  GA1:  at most k games from G⊆T×T  during time slots in P⊆S.

    The  original  version  of  the  ITC2021  sports  scheduling  problem  also  allowed  the  constraints
above to be soft, penalizing violations of the soft constraints while strictly adhering to the hard
ones.  Additionally, the original version of the problem considered two more soft constraints:

    •  Fairness  and  separation  constraints.   Increase  the  attractiveness  and  fairness  of  the
       tournament.

          –  FA2:  at any point in time, the difference in the number of home games played between
             any two teams does not exceed two.
          –  SE1:  there  are  at  least  10  time  slots  between  each  pair  of  games  involving  the  same
             teams.

4.5.3    Instances
The problem instances stem from the International Timetabling Competition 2021 [VBG23b] and
a follow-up study that generated additional problem instances using the same format [VGC +24].
These problem instances were generated using ‘Instance Space Analysis’ [SMMn23].  They feature
a  realistic  set  of  constraints  for  real-world  applications.   Furthermore,  they  are  challenging  for
state-of-the-art MIP and even dedicated sports tournament solvers.  Finally, they feature a wide
variety of characteristics that can expose different strengths and weaknesses of algorithms; see, e.g.,
[VGC +24].  Moreover, the instances were constructed so that a feasible solution is known to exist.
More  specifically,  we  made  use  of  the  fact  that  generating  a  basic  sports  schedule  is  easy,  even
when some of the constraints are considered.  Suppose a problem instance should suffice p ‘easy’
constraints from type A and q ‘difficult’ constraints from type B. Then, we started by generating
a solution that satisfies constraints A and added constraints of type B to this solution–such that
the respective solution is compatible with constraints of type B.
    The problem instances in this benchmark can be divided into four subclasses:  ITC2021, Large,
Medium,  and Small.  The ITC2021 class corresponds to the 45 original problem instances from
the  International  Timetabling  Competition  on  Sports  Timetabling  2021  [ITC],  considering  all
hard and soft constraints.  Within the ITC2021 class are multiple instances for which no feasible
solution was reported within a reasonable amount of time.  The Large, Medium, and Small classes
represent  feasibility  versions  of  the  ITC2021  problem  instances.   More  specifically,  to  lower  the
entrance barrier and simplify the problem, we ignore all soft constraints and, therefore, reduce the
optimization problem to its feasibility version.  For further experimentation, we also generated an
additional set of problem instances having exactly the same number of constraints as the original
ones; however, with 6, 8, and 12 teams only.  These instances are contained in Medium and Small.







                                                           21
Figure 10:  (Sports Scheduling) Solution times with Simulated Annealing (SA) and CPLEX (ILP) for the
feasibility version of the problem.  The time limit for SA was iteration-based, while the ILP solver timed
out after 24 hours.


4.5.4    Classical Baseline
We  provide  feasible  solutions  to  all  problem  instances–which  were  obtained  during  the  instance
generation.  An online solution checker is available in the validator section of [ITC].  Furthermore,
the repository also includes a MIP formulation modeling example proposed in [BKS21].
    Figure10shows  the  average  solution  times  for  a  state-of-the-art  Simulated  Annealing  (SA)
algorithm (see [RPDGS22]) and for a MIP formulation similar to the one presented in [BKS21].
Both algorithms were run on a machine equipped with an AMD EPYC-7532 32-core processor,
using 8 cores for solving the MIP (CPLEX 12.10) and a single core for the SA algorithm.  The MIP
solver was given a time limit of 24 hours, while the SA algorithm was stopped after a fixed number
of iterations.  The MIP performed reasonably well on small and most medium-sized instances but
failed to solve any of the large instances.  Also, the SA algorithm managed to find only solutions
to  three  large  instances,  even  though  it  was  given  considerable  computational  resources.   As  a
reminder, the instances were selected in such a way that it is known that existing state-of-the-art
solvers heavily struggle to find feasible solutions.

4.6    Portfolio Optimization
4.6.1    Background
The  problem  of  quantitative  investment  and  risk  diversification  in  portfolio  optimization  spans
a  broad  spectrum  of  methodologies,  each  incorporating  different  simplifications,  investor  prior-
ities,  and  trade-offs  between  risk  exposure,  returns,  computational  complexity,  robustness,  and
out-of-sample performance.  A foundational approach is Markowitz’s mean-variance optimization,
formulated as a convex quadratic program [Mar52].  This framework has been extended to address
real-world constraints [KTF14], estimation errors [Haf80,CR83,LCBP99], sensitivity to input vari-
ability [MM08,Pra19,BTN99,TK04],  and Bayesian techniques that integrate expert judgment
with  statistical  models  [BL92, AZ10, CPT18].   Computational  limitations  of  the  methodologies
for practically relevant cases [MM15] have led to the adoption of,  e.g.,  fixed-mix strategies that
improve model transparency and stability [Mer69,DGU07], hierarchical risk parity and risk bud-
geting techniques [LdP16,GT22], and multiperiod approaches which help to capture intertemporal
effects and hedging demands [RA00,GP13].  In fact, portfolio optimization models can be defined
with varying complexity [PPSHW15,KR19,LUM22,HP23] depending on whether one aims to also
jointly model risk, return predictability, and impact costs over time while addressing the exponen-
tial growth of time complexity with respect to the number of assets and rebalancing periods [BS11].
Portfolio optimization can transform into a stochastic dynamic programming problem, which, un-
der realistic conditions that account for, e.g., transaction costs or short selling, has been proven to
be computationally intractable for portfolios with more than two risky assets [Con79,BSS10].
    Given its relevance and complexity, portfolio optimization has attracted considerable interest
from the quantum computing community.  Theoretical research suggests that quantum algorithms
may offer speedups under specific conditions that may, however, not hold in real-world instances;
see,  e.g.,  [KPS19,RHG                +16,LR24].  Another line of research has investigated how one may ap-
proach  simple  portfolio  optimization  instances  with  near-term  compatible  quantum  algorithms
[BBD +22,SMMW21,MKS                           +22].  The simplified version of the problem derived here focuses on the


                                                            22
                     computational complexity in the multiperiod setting, using a binary quadratic formulation of the
                     mean-variance model with linear constraints, and perfect knowledge of expected future returns and
                     covariances.  This allows for the creation of compact yet computationally challenging problem in-
                     stances, as the problem is NP-hard [Bie96], and the systematic benchmarking of current quantum
                     algorithmic capabilities.














                     4.6.2    Problem statement
                     LetT  :={t1,...,tm} be an ordered set of discrete time points such that 0≤t1 <t2 <···<tm,
                     representing a finite investment horizon in the future.  Consider an artificial deterministic market
                     that is fully described by a closed system of n∈ Z+ financial assets{ai|i = 1...,n}, where each
                     asset ai has known expected market prices{¯pit} at each time t∈T .  Assuming a myopic investor
                     in a mean-variance framework and no access to additional information, the objective is to find a
                     multiperiod trading strategyS1  :={xit} at t1, where portfolio allocations xit∈{0, 1} represent
                     binary investment decisions of up toC normalized capital unitsu∈ R+ into assets{ai}.  We define
                     the price pit  as follows:  Let ei  := u/¯pit0,  then pit  = ei¯pit,  i.e.,  we compute how many assets of
                     type i we can buy for one unit of cash at time t1.  The amount of stocks ei we can get at time t1
                     for one unit of cash u is then used for all later time steps, i.e., pit  tells us what has become out
                     of one cash unit invested into asset i at time t.  The investor seeks to balance returns and risk at
                     terminal time tm, where the temporal returns are given by (pit−pi,t−1)xit and the temporal risk
                     is measured through the risk preference λ-weighted positive semidefinite covariance matrix Σ as
                     λ(px)T Σxp, while obeying a set of regularizing trading constraints.
                         These constraints aim to incorporate more realistic real-world conditions, although here sim-
                     plified into a quadratic optimization problem:
                         •  Transaction  cost:   Rebalancing  of x  over T   incurs  costs  due  to  fees,  taxation,  etc.  that
                            negatively offset the returns by a factor of transaction costδ∈ R+ for each changepit|xit−1−
                            xit| =pit(xit−1 +xit− 2xit−1xit) and a liquidation cost δpixi at terminal time tm.  This is a
                            strong simplification, as cost factors are neither global nor time-invariant scalars, but rather
                            stochastic functions driven by market uncertainties.
                         •  Short selling cost: Given a subsetf∈F⊆{ai} of assets permissible for short selling positions
                            overT , a fixed loan rate for short positionsρ∈ R+ is applied to each allocationρpftxft with
                            f∈F.
                         •  Cash flow limits:  Letu∈ R+ denote the unit value of cash, andC the total available units of
                            normalized capital.  Each asset is assigned an indicator τi∈{−1, +1}, representing a short
                            (−1) or long (+1) position.  At any time, the total net investmentPiτixit must not exceed
                            the capital limit C, and the total number of assets held at each time step must be bounded
                            by B, which serves as an upper limit on the number of acquired positions.
                         •  Cash interest:  Temporarily unused capital earns risk-free interest νu(C−Piτixit) with a
                            risk-free rate ν∈ R+.
                         •  Multiple shares: We also allow that each asseti can be selected up tok times.  We use a unary
                            encoding where the Hamming weight ofk binary variables encodes the number of shares, i.e.,
                            we essentially considerk copies of the same asset that can be selected.  For the small number
Why is it interesting?of shares considered here, this is as efficient as other encodings, but it has the advantage that
                            we can easily model the transaction costs.  Thus, we expand the vector of portfolio allocations
A vast array of industrial and scientific domains are interested in solving problems where oneto a 2kn-dimensional binary vector x for the n assets at each time t, where each block of k
aims to find an optimal composition of a portfolio of coupled objects with respective observ-binary variables represents a single asset type.  The inclusion of a factor of 2 accounts for the
ables that typically share a common probability space.  (Financial) Portfolio management isallowance of short selling,  with an equal number of vector elements allocated to represent
one of the hardest variants of this problem.  It concerns the risk-sensitive allocation of a time-both long and short positions.
dependent investment budget for a number of diversified financial assets whose behavior varies
with time according to unknown stochastic processes,  which are driven by external factors.23
The hardness of this problem can be explored at different levels of complexity, even at a small
scale, and, as such, allows systematic tracking of algorithmic and hardware progress.
    The problem can then be formulated as a Binary Quadratic Program (BQP), where the objec-
tive is a quadratic function subject to linear constraints, and the decision variables are restricted
to be binary:
                                              z              risk}|           {
                                      mX       nX   nX
                min                         λ           τipitxitσijtτjpjtxjt
    x∈{0,1}n×m,y∈{0,1}|C|×m          t=1      i=1  j=1

                                        n−1X                            nX
                                     −       τi(pi,t+1−pit)xit      −      δpit(xit−1 +xit− 2xit−1xit)
                                        i=1  |         {z         }    i=2 |                {z                 }
                                                     return                       !  transaction cost
                                                                                              nX
                                           −νuX2cyct         + ρX        pftxft      +  δ        (pi1xi1 +pimxim)
                                              |   c∈C{z    }     | f∈F{z       }           | i=1        {z             }

                                               cash interest    short selling cost      t1 transaction + liquidation cost

subject to

                            nX
                               τixit +X      2cyct =C                                for all t∈T                            (3)
                          i=1            c∈C
                                             nX
                                                xit≤B                                for all t∈T                            (4)
                                           i=1
where (3) describes the capital limit and (4) limits the number of assets that can be included in the
portfolio.  Since we restricted the problem to binary variables, we modeled the amount of available
cash units as binary variables yct∈{0, 1} with a suitable c∈C  :={0,...,⌊log2(C)⌋} such that
P
   c∈C 2c≥C.  It is worth noting that alternative formulations may also be possible.

4.6.3    Instances


         Parameter                         Value                      # inst   n   m  u  B     # vars
   ν     risk-free rate                            0.01%                  4          10     10    3      4             710
   δ     transaction cost rate               0.1%                         4          10     15    3      4           1065
   ρ     loan rate on short positions    0.0025%                          4          50     10    3     20          3110
   C     available # of cash units         10 units                       4          50     15    3     20          4665
   k     Max.  # units of each asset     3                                4         200    10    3     50        12110
                                                                          4         200    15    3     50        18165
                                                                          4         400    10    3    100       24110
                                                                          4         400    15    3    100       36165

Table 5:  (Portfolio) (left) Fixed parameters used to generate the portfolio optimization problem instances.
The annual rates of ν  and ρ correspond to 2.55% and 0.92%, respectively.  The total amount of available
cash equals $1,000,000.  (right) Overview of the different sizes and parameters of the Portfolio Optimization
instances for binary variables.  We generated four instances for each setting.

    Table5(left) outlines the parameters that are used in our experiments.  The parameter choices
are based on established literature [GKVdW05,D’a02,Tep00].  Using these parameters, we gener-
ated 4 instances each (1 containing the original data and 3 with randomly perturbed data) for 10,
50, 200, and 400 possible assets with two different time horizons: 10 days and 15 days.  We used real
S&P 500 data from January 1, 2024, to May 31, 2024, for the asset pricespit and the corresponding
covariances σijt.  The size of the instances is defined by the number of assets n,  the number of
considered time steps m, and the number of chosen asset units k.  The risk-affinity/aversion pa-
rameterλ, the unit limit on asset selection B, and the capital boundC have a strong influence on
the solvability of the instances.  We would like to highlight that the repository includes instances
with λ = 0, which represents an edge-case setting that lacks operational meaning but serves as a
simplified mathematical representation.
    Moreover, we generated randomly perturbed instances based on real-world S&P 500 data from
January 1, 2024, to May 31, 2024.  The generated data is sampled independently at each time step
using the t-distribution with ν = 5, scaled to the mean and covariance of the stocks as given by
the original data, with a rolling window of 30 days.  Outliers are randomly added to the dataset.


                                                              24
We always consider the n largest companies, ranked by their market capitalization as of January
1, 2025.  Table5(right) gives an overview of the instances in the problem class, with the instances
on top being randomly generated and the instances on the bottom representing real-world data.

4.6.4    Classical Baseline



















Figure 11:  (Portfolio)  Runtimes (solid lines) and MIP Gap (dashed lines) for Gurobi with a time limit
of 3600s for different values of λ averaged over three randomly generated similar instances.


                                           Gurobi                                                        Abs2
             λ              LB    Incumbent    Gap (%)    RT (s)                 Incumbent    TTS (s)    Gap (%)
             0        -879572         -879572            0.00          0.4           -879572           90.0            0.00
   0.000001           -872141         -872055            0.01       398.7            -872055           79.1            0.00
     0.00001      -887265.36         -819899            8.21     3600.1              -819899           30.2            0.00
     0.00005      -692341.57         -680124            1.80     3600.2              -680124           50.7            0.00
      0.0001      -604495.30         -586823            3.01     3600.2              -586823         206.7            0.00
      0.0005      -424863.29         -386990            9.80     3600.1              -384862       1497.6            0.55
        0.001     -367893.74         -314736          16.90     3600.2               -299298         741.9            4.91
         0.01     -141194.79         -437920      3124.21     3661.8                    -2825       1510.8          99.35

Table  6:    (Portfolio)  Comparison  of  (classical)  BQP  using  Gurobi  12.0.1  with  a  tolerance  of  1e-4
vs.(quantum-ready) QUBO formulation of a portfolio optimization problem–a050                        t15  s00 instance.  The
ABS2 Gap is the relative gap between the ABS2 incumbent and the gurobi incumbent.

    The tests are conducted by running the BQP model with Gurobi 12.0.1 on an Intel Xeon Gold
6338 CPU @ 2.00GHz processor using 128 threads with a timeout of 3600s and using the QUBO
model with ABS2 on a system with four A40 SXM4 48 GB GPUs with a timeout of 3600s.  An
overview of different parameters up to n = 50 assets can be seen in Figure11.  With increasing      λ,
the running time and the upper bound on the optimality gap (MIP Gap) also increase.  Table6
shows  execution  details  on  the  instance  for n  =  50, m  =  15, k  =  3, B  =  20, C  =  10:  All  the
objective function values shown are negative because we are minimizing the risk, and therefore,
the profit is subtracted in the objective function.  As may be expected,  when the risk adversity
increases,  the  profit  decreases,  as  well  as  the  gap  between  the  lower  and  upper  bounds  of  the
solution.  The computational performance varies depending on the risk aversion parameter λ.  For
λ = 0, the risk term is ignored, and only the profit is optimized.  This can be quickly solved to
optimality.  In the risk-averse case with a high λ = 0.01, the opposite happens.  The lowest risk
strategy is to take the risk-free interest rate ν = 0.01 and receive a profit of C·m·ν = 1000.
    Figure12shows  an  in-depth  analysis  for  a  problem  instance  with       n  =  50, m  =  15, k  =  3,
B = 20, C  = 10.  More specifically, the Figure shows how the objective value changes over time
for λ  =  0.0005.   The  same  system  was  used  for  Gurobi  and  ABS2.   Although  BQP  achieves  a
better final objective value, the QUBO approach reaches good solutions in a substantially shorter
time–without developing specialized heuristics.






                                                              25
                     Figure 12:  (Portfolio) The plot illustrates the best found objective values at every step of the solving for
                     different risk aversion parameters with Abs2 and Gurobi solvers for one instance with λ = 0.0005 and 50
                     assets.  While ABS2 finds good solutions faster, Gurobi eventually achieves better results.

                     4.7    Maximum Independent Set
                     4.7.1    Background
                     An  independent  (or  stable)  set  is  a  set  of  vertices  not  adjacent  to  each  other  in  a  graph,  i.e.,
                     no edge connects any two vertices of the set.  The maximum independent set (MIS) problem (or
                     maximum stable set problem) is to find the largest independent set for a given graph.  It is deeply
                     rooted  in  graph  theory  and  combinatorial  optimization  and  has  a  long  history  of  research.   Its
                     decision problem is one of the first problems shown to be NP-complete [Kar72].  It is known to be
                     strongly NP-hard for general graphs, while it can be solved in polynomial time for certain classes
                     of graphs, e.g., P5-free graphs and perfect graphs.  The independent set is a fundamental feature
                     of a graph and relates to various other graph parameters.  The MIS for a graph is equivalent to the
                     maximum clique problem for its complement graph.  A set of independent vertices is equivalent
                     to its complement set being a vertex cover.  Thus,  the sum of the size of the MIS and the size
                     of  the  minimum  vertex  cover  is  equal  to  the  number  of  vertices  in  the  graph.   The  MIS  is  also
                     useful for modeling industry problems, e.g., non-intersecting label placement on a map [AVKS98],
                     discovering  stable  genetic  components  for  designing  engineered  genetic  systems  [HLH +20],  and
                     strategic planning, such as choosing locations for stores [WLG +22].










                          There have been extensive studies both on exact and approximate algorithms.  As far as we
                     know, the best-known exact algorithm can compute the MIS of an n-vertex graph in 1.1996nnO(1)
                     time and polynomial space [XN17].  As for approximate algorithms, most studies (too many to list
                     here) consider a particular class of graphs and develop algorithms with constant approximation
                     ratios since the maximum independent set problem, in general, is Poly-APX-complete, meaning it
                     is as hard as any problem that can be approximated to a polynomial factor [BEP05].  Quantum
                     algorithms have also been investigated recently.  For example,  a method is proposed for solving
                     the maximum independent set problem on unit disk graphs [CCJ90] using a quantum simulator
                     with  Rydberg  atomic  arrays  [EKC +22].   It  should  be  noted  that  for  unit  disk  graphs,  better
                     approximation results are available than for the general case; see, e.g., [MBHI +95,DdJ20].


Why is it interesting?

The unweighted maximum independent set problem is a classic NP-hard mathematical prob-
lem.  Starting at problem sizes of several hundred variables, there are known instances that
are hard to solve to proven optimality with existing methods [Slo25], and which are difficult to26
tackle even heuristically.  An interesting property of this problem class is that it is well-suited
for translation into relatively sparse QUBOs–often with small coefficients.
4.7.2    Problem statement
Let G = (V,E) be a graph with vertices V  ={1,...,n} and edges E⊂ V×V .  The maximum
independent set problem for the graph G is

                                       maxS⊆V|S| with i,j∈S⇒ (i,j) /∈E.

It can be represented as a Binary Linear Program (BLP):
                                    X
                            maxx∈{0,1}n  xi subject to xi +xj≤ 1 for all (i,j)∈E,
                                    i∈V
or as a Binary Quadratic Program (BQP):
                              maxx∈{0,1}nXx2i  subject to xixj = 0 for all (i,j)∈E.


                                      i∈V

Note thatxi =x2i  holds for binary variables.  The constraint in each formulation forbidsxi =xj =
1, for all (i,j)∈E, i.e., both ends of each edge cannot be in an independent set.  For the weighted
version, some weights wi > 0, i∈V , can be added to the vertices.

4.7.3    Instances
Any collection of graphs might be a suitable benchmark set for MIS. We aimed to collect some
instances known to be challenging and added several smaller ones to facilitate progress tracking.
We collected instances from various sources, in particular:  Network Repository [RA15], SteinLib
[KMV00], OESIS Implementation Challenge [Slo25], and self-generated graphs.  Furthermore, we
provide a program that takes a graph and an independent set and verifies that it is indeed a stable
set in the graph.

4.7.4    Classical Baseline
We provide formulations as binary linear programs and as QUBO.  These can be solved by any
suitable solver.  We provide baseline results for the binary linear program using Gurobi 12.0.1 run
on an Intel Xeon Gold 6338 CPU @ 2.00 GHz processor using 128 threads with a timeout of 7200
seconds.  The baseline results for the QUBO formulation are computed using ABS2 as a heuristic
run on four Nvidia A40 48GB with a timeout of 7200 seconds.  Corresponding runtime, TTS, and
absolute  gaps  to  the  optimal/best-known  solutions  can  be  found  in  Figure13.   Exact  data  and
instance names can be obtained from Table7.























Figure  13:   (Independent  Set)   Runtimes,  time-to-solution,  and  absolute  gap  to  optimal/best-known
solution for the problem sorted by Gurobi’s runtime.  Only gaps > 0 are plotted.







                                                          27
                            Table 7:  (Independent Set) Best solution, Runtimes, TTS, and absolute gaps to best found (some even
                            optimal) solutions for Gurobi 12.0.1 and Abs2.  Notably, only Gurobi checks optimality.  Abs2 runs as a
                            heuristic.  Please note that we do not report any runtimes for ABS2, since the stopping criteria for these
                            heuristic solvers vary.
                                                                                                     Gurobi                Abs2
#     Name                                      Nodes      Edges        Best    RT (s)   TTS (s)   Gap           TTS (s)   Gap        Source
 4    farm                  4.8    Network Design17          39           10         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
 2    mammalia-kangaroo-interactions                 17          91        4         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
 3    johnson8-2-4          4.8.1    Background28         210              7         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
 8    ibm32                                          32          90       13         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
 5    karate                Network  design  models  have  wide  applications  in  telecommunications,  transportation  planning34          78200.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
 1    football              [Gav91,MW84], and power networks [SFE                        +23].  One common formulation for this problem is to35         118160.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
 7    chesapeake            use an MIP formulation [BG9539         170].  Given an     n×n matrix T ,  where each entry tij  represents the170.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
16    MANN-a9                                        45         918        3         0.1          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
10    aves-sparrow-socialtraffic to be routed between vertexi andj, and an integerp> 0, construct a simple directed graph52         454130.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
11    insecta-ant-colony1-day38D  = (V,A) with vertex set V  ={1,...,n} and a subset of selected edges S∗⊆ A,  where each56        113460.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
 6    sloane  1dc  64       vertex has indegree and outdegree equal to p.  Furthermore, all the demands are routed such that64         543100.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
23    hamming6-4                                     64         704       12         0.2          0.0       0          0.0       0    [Slo25]
12    hamming6-2            the maximum load on any single edge of the network is minimized.  The load on an edge is the64        182420.0          0.0       00.0       0[RA15]
20    johnson8-4-4          sum of all the traffic that passes through that edge.  The problem is NP-hard [BG9570        185550.1          0.0       00.0       0[KMV00]].
13    es60fst03                                    113         142        55         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
19    johnson16-2-4                                120        5460        15         0.1          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
15    es60fst01                                    123         159        60         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
26    C125-9                                       125         787        34         1.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [Slo25]
24    sloane  1zc  128                             128        1120        18         0.2          0.0       0          0.0       0    [Slo25]
22    sloane  1dc  128                             128        1471        16         0.1          0.0       0          0.0       0    [KMV00]
18    sloane  2dc  128                             128        5173         5         0.1          0.0       028        0.0       0    [KMV00]
25    insecta-ant-colony3-day09                    160        8883         9         0.2          0.0       0          0.0       0    [Slo25]
 9    es60fst04                                    162         238        78         0.0          0.0       0          0.1       0    [RA15]
27    keller4                                      171        5100        11         1.7          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
14    es60fst02                                    186         280        88         0.0          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
17    c-fat200-1                                   200        1534        18         0.1          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
21    gen200   p0-9  44                            200        1990        44         0.1          0.0       0          0.0       0    [KMV00]
29    brock200-2                                   200      10024         12         6.0          3.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
31    brock200-3                                   200      12048          9         7.6          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
30    brock200-4                                   200      13089          8         6.3          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
28    brock200-1                                   200      14834          6         5.6          0.0       0          0.0       0    [RA15]
37    brock400-1                                   400      20077         27    7200.1     1269.0       0              8.4       0    [RA15]
33    R  500  005  1                               500        6256        91    7200.0        86.0       2             0.4       1    [RA15]
35    C500-9                                       500      12418         57    7200.1        20.0       3             7.5       0    [Riv24]
45    brock800-1                                   800     112095         23    7200.3       395.0       3         1139.3       0     [RA15]
49    frb45-21-3                                   945      58245         45    7201.5       806.0       1             8.7       2    [RA15]
39    R  1000  005  1                             1000      24670        117    7200.1     2859.0       9           169.6       2     [RA15]
41    hamming10-4                                 1024      89600         40    7200.2       108.0       0             0.1       0    [GHG +21]
42    frb50-23-3                                  1150      81068         50    7200.2     3226.0       2           252.3       1     [RA15]
40    frb53-24-1                                  1272      94227         53    7200.1       903.0       3         1023.5       2     [RA15]
32    socfb-haverford76                           1446      59589        282      838.7        26.0       0            0.6       0    [RA15]
47    p hat1500-3                                 1500     277006         94    7200.8     3915.0       0              0.2       0    [RA15]
48    p hat1500-1                                 1500     839327         12    7201.4       523.0       1             2.4       0    [RA15]
46    frb59-26-2                                  1534     126163         59    7200.8     3980.0       3              1.9       3    [RA15]
34    sorrell7                                    2048      39424        198    7200.1       513.0      13          663.5       9     [RA15]
44    sorrell4                                    2048     504451         24    7200.2       257.0       1         1708.8       0     [RA15]
43    socfb-trinity100                            2613     111996        499    7200.2     1891.0       1          1361.5       0     [RA15]
36    keller6                                     3361   1026582          59    7200.1     2377.0      18           290.9       0     [Riv24]
50    frb100-40                                   4000     572774        100    7205.1     5695.0      23          4634.8       7     [RA15]
38    C4000-5                                     4000   3997732          18    7200.1     7200.1       6           167.0       0     [RA15]
                          Although we will focus on the mathematical formulation as a multicommodity-directed model,
                      many other formulations have been used in network design,  depending on the problem context.
                      In  [GCF99, ABW02],  the  authors  provide  surveys  of  alternative  formulations.   In  the  standard
                      formulation,  both  flow  decision  variables  and  design  decision  variables  are  modeled  explicitly
                      [BG95,BCGT98,GCF99].  In this case,  the linear programming relaxations of multicommodity
                      flow formulations provide lower bounds that are normally weak [GCF99,ABW02].  To overcome
                      this issue, in [ABW02], the authors remove the flow variables as explicit decisions and embed them
                      within the design variables.  Furthermore, in [GCF99,ABW02] the authors also provide a survey of
                      different methods that have been used for network design.  For example, in [MMW86], the authors
                      apply Benders decomposition and demonstrate the effectiveness of variable elimination preprocess-
                      ing and a dual ascent procedure to accelerate the decomposition algorithm.  In [BG95], the authors
                      report on computational experience with a cutting plane algorithm for the above formulation.  In
                      [BS96], they use the column generation technique to obtain near-optimal solutions.

                      4.8.2    Problem statement
                      Given a matrix T ∈ Nn×n, and an integer p > 0, construct a simple directed graph D = (V,A)
                      with  vertex  set V  ={1,...,n},  where  each  vertex  has  indegree  and  outdegree  equal  to p,  and
                      simultaneously, in D, route tij  units of flow from vertex i to j, for all 1≤ i̸= j≤ n, such as to
                      minimize the maximum aggregated flow on any arc in D.
                          We can formulate this network design problem as a multicommodity design problem as follows:
                      For k,i,j∈{1,...,n} we define binary variables xij∈{0, 1} which are 1 iff an arc is established
                      between vertexi andj and 0, otherwise. Further, we define non-negative integer variablesfkij∈ Z+
                      that represent the flow of commodity k between vertices i and j, and a suitable big constant M.
                      Then we get:


                                                   minx,f,zz                      k,i,j∈{1,...,n}

                                             subject toX        xij =p                                   for all i,                                      (5)
                                                           j̸=i
                                                           X    xji =p                                   for all i,                                      (6)


                                                           j̸=i
                                             X                fkij≤Mxij                             for all k,i̸=j,                            (7)
                                                 fkij−Xfkji =tki                                 for all i,k,                                   (8)
                                             j̸=i         j̸=i
                                                          X
                                                              fkij≤z                                   for all i̸=j.                                (9)
                                                           k


                          Constraints  (5)  and  (6)  set  the  outdegree  and  indegree  of  each  vertex  to   p.   Constraint  (7)
                      ensures that flow is only allowed on arcs in A.  Constraint (8) ensures the flow conservation for
                      each commodityk.  (9) ensures  z is greater than the aggregated flow on any arc.  Since the objective
                      is to minimize z, (9) will be met with equality at the arc with the highest aggregated flow.

                      4.8.3    Instances
                      The  original  problem  by  [BG95]  set     p  =  2, n  =  24, T ∈{0,..., 100}n×n,  and  had  continuous
Why is it interesting?flow variables.  We have multiplied all demands by 1,000 and require an integral flow, making the
The  min-max  objective  function  underlying  network  design  models  is  linear,  and  the  prob-problem completely integer.  To provide smaller versions of the problem, the benchmark instances
lem often has a sparse structure.  While it is trivial to construct a feasible solution, findinguse the data of the first n vertices from n = 5 to 24.
optimal solutions is very difficult.  The particular problem presented in this section has been
withstanding all attempts to solve it to proven optimality for the last 30 years in its 24-node29
size.  Furthermore, network design models have wide applications in telecommunications and
transportation planning [Gav91,MW84].
    We provide a checking routine that, given a sequencen, a file with the demands, and a file with
a solution, checks whether the solution is feasible and computes the objective value.

4.8.4    Classical Baseline
We provide a basic IP formulation of the problem.  More sophisticated cutting planes are described
in [BG95].  Results with the basic IP formulation found using Gurobi 11.0.0 on an AMD EPYC-
7542 32-core processor with 64 threads and a time limit of 2 hours are summarized in Figure14.
We were able to solve the problem up to size n = 9 to proven optimality within the time limit.
For larger sizes, heuristic, but not necessarily optimal, solutions are provided.  The instance with
24 vertices and continuous flow variables is also part of MIPLIB2017 [GHG +21], the latest results
of which can be found at [dan].  Note that those results correspond to the unscaled model version
with continuous variables, which, therefore, has a slightly different objective value than the scaled
one.  However, the solutions are compatible.























Figure 14:  (Network)   Runtime  is the time to compute a proven optimal solution.  Time-to-solution  is
the time until the best solution was found.  Rel. opt. Gap is the gap to the optimal or best-known solution.
MIP Gap is the gap to the lower bound.  Only gaps > 0 are plotted.


4.9    Vehicle Routing Problem
4.9.1    Background
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is the problem of determining the most efficient routes for
a fleet of vehicles to deliver goods or services to a set of customers, typically starting and ending
at  a  central  depot.   This  problem  is  highly  relevant  for  many  real-world  applications  in  logis-
tics,  transportation,  and  supply  chain  management,  see,  e.g.,  [CHH22].   Originally  proposed  in
[DR59]  as  ‘the  truck  dispatching  problem’,  many  different  variants  of  VRP  have  emerged  since
then [Hel17,VLM20].  Providing a collection of relevant and difficult VRP instances is a complex
task because there are numerous variants.  Although classical heuristics for VRP are practically
very  successful,  many  papers  on  quantum  approaches  for  VRP  problems  have  been  published
[XLC +24,MBF23,LDTA23,FGL                                +21].  We include the VRP problem class in this collection to
facilitate a comparison with existing work and to explore the capabilities of quantum optimization
algorithms for a practically relevant problem.
    We  limit  ourselves  to  a  specific  variant  of  VRP,  the  Capacitated  Vehicle  Routing  Problem
(CVRP), where the objective is to minimize the aggregated costs across all routes while satisfying
the  vehicle  capacity,  effectively  limiting  the  number  of  goods  that  each  vehicle  can  carry.   This
variant, in fact, corresponds to the original problem formulation from [DR59], where it was pre-
sented as a generalization of the TSP [MTZ60].  Compared to TSP, VRP involves an additional
level of decision-making, as customers not only need to be served but also assigned to vehicles.  An
example CVRP instance and its optimal solution are visualized in Figure15.






                                                            30
                          Due to the practical and academic relevance of the CVRP, numerous optimization approaches
                     have been developed, and research continues [SM21].  Exact methods include branch-and-bound
                     and  branch-and-cut  strategies.   A  well-known  heuristic  is  the  savings  algorithm  [CW64],  which
                     has been modified and improved in various ways.  CVRPs can be further divided into symmetric
                     CVRPs  and  asymmetric  CVRPs,  depending  on  whether  the  direction  of  a  tour  affects  its  cost.
                     Some  solution  approaches  can  only  be  applied  to  symmetric  CVRPs.   A  review  of  established
                     exact  and  heuristic  methods  can  be  found  in  [TV02a, TV02b].   Metaheuristics  include  genetic
                     algorithms, simulated annealing, and Tabu search.  A recent comparison of different heuristics and
                     metaheuristics can be found in [MDM24].  Alternative research directions are approaches based
                     on  machine  learning  [EJBB24].   More  recently,  quantum  optimization  has  been  explored  as  a
                     potential strategy.  Since naive QUBO formulations for CVRP require many variables [HNN +20],
                     hybrid  strategies  have  been  used,  for  example,  by  separating  the  problem  into  a  clustering  and
                     routing phase [FRG +19,HMCL24].  Many hybrid approaches rely on solving the vehicle-customer
                     assignment classically and then solving TSPs using quantum optimization.  Successful applications
                     will need to overcome this simplification, as solving TSPs exactly, e.g., via Concorde [ABCC03], is
                     unlikely to be outperformed by quantum methods anytime soon.




















                     Figure 15:  (Routing)  Example instance tai75a (75 customers, 10 vehicles) from the Rochat and Taillard
                     dataset [RT95] and optimal solution as obtained from CVRPLIB [LOQ].  Each line color represents the
                     route of one vehicle between the customers (         ) starting and ending at the central depot (        ).  The thickness
                     of  a  line  indicates  the  remaining  capacity  of  the  corresponding  vehicle  along  the  route.   This  example
                     demonstrates the combinatorial complexity of finding the best route among all possible routes while ful-
                     filling capacity constraints.


                     4.9.2    Problem statement
                     Consider  a  CVRP  with n ≥  1  customers,  where  each  customer i  has  a  demand di ∈ N  with
                     i∈{1,...,n}.   Furthermore,  we  assume  that  there  is  a  homogeneous  fleet  of K ≥  1  vehicles,
                     where each vehicle has a total capacity of Q∈ N.  Each vehicle starts and ends its tour at the
                     depot.  The cost of moving a vehicle from customer i toj is given bycij∈ N withi,j∈{0,...,n}
                     and i̸= j, where “customer 0” is used to represent the depot.  With this definition, we presume
                     all-to-all connectivity between the customers (and the depot).  While the cost matrix is generally
Why is it interesting?arbitrary,  we  focus  here  on  a  special  case  relevant  to  the  benchmarking  instances  we  provide,
                     where the costs are based on graph vertex distances in a metric space that satisfies non-negativity
Determining the optimal solution to a Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is NP-hard [LK81](as given by the cost domain) and symmetry (i.e., cij  = cji∀i,j∈{0,...,n}, the condition for
and of high practical relevance as it has many direct industrial applications and, hence, thethe aforementioned symmetric CVRP), which means they also obey the triangle inequality (i.e.,
potential  for  a  significant  business  value  impact.   Similar  to  the  network  problem  from  thecij≤cik +ckj∀i,j,k∈{0,...,n}).  Each customer must be served exactly once by a vehicle, while
previous section, it is trivial to find feasible (but not necessarily optimal) solutions.  Due to
the complexity of the problem,  mostly small instances can be solved exactly,  but heuristics31
and metaheuristics are often well-suited to tackle real-world instances.  This problem class has
already received significant attention from the quantum community.
the total customer demand on a given route must not exceed the capacity limit of the vehicle.  The
optimization goal is to determine a feasible solution that minimizes the aggregated costs across all
routes.  This does not necessarily require the use of all K  vehicles, i.e., some may remain in the
depot and, hence, do not contribute to the costs.
    A CVRP can be modeled in many different ways, one of which is the two-index vehicle flow
formulation with Miller-Tucker-Zemlin (MTZ) constraints [SM21].  Following [MDS17],  this for-
mulation reads:


                                  n+1X
                            minx,y      cijxij                                                                                           (10)
                                  i,j=0
                                   i̸=j
                        n+1X
           subject to        xij = 1                                                for all i∈{1...,n},                     (11)
                        j=1
                         j̸=i
                          nX         n+1X
                             xih =        xhj                                       for all h∈{1,...,n},                   (12)
                        i=0i̸=h      j=1
                                     j̸=h
                         nX
                             x0j≤K,                                                                                                 (13)
                        j=1
                              yj≥yi +djxij−Q(1−xij)             for all i̸=j∈{0,...,n + 1},       (14)
                               di≤yi≤Q,                                      for all i∈{0,...,n + 1},             (15)
                             xij∈{0, 1}                                         for all i,j∈{0,...,n + 1},          (16)
                               yi∈ N0                                              for all i∈{0,...,n + 1}.             (17)
    In this IP, the optimization is done with respect to two types of decision variables.  First, the
binary  variables x∈{0, 1}(n+2)×(n+2)  and  second,  the  integer  variables y∈ Nn+20    .   The  binary
variable xij  takes  the  value  1  if  and  only  if  there  is  a  direct  route  between  customers i  and j
for i,j∈{0,...,n + 1}, where “customer 0” is the depot, as introduced above.  To simplify the
notation, we also symbolically introduce “customern+1” to represent the same depot, which allows
us to distinguish between starting at the depot (i = 0) and ending at the depot (i =n + 1), where
cj,n+1 :=c0j  for all j∈{1,...,n}.  Furthermore, the integer variable yi represents the cumulated
demand on the route that visits customer i for i∈{0,...,n + 1}, where d0 :=dn+1 := 0.
    The objective, Eq. (10), represents the aggregated costs of all routes that need to be minimized.
The first set of constraints, Eq. (11), ensures that each customer is only visited once. The second set
of constraints, Eq. (12), ensures a correct flow of vehicles.  The third constraint, Ineq. (13), ensures
that only up toK vehicles can leave the depot.  The fourth and fifth set of constraints, Ineq. (14))
and (15), follow the MTZ modeling of a TSP [MTZ60] and are responsible for ensuring compliance
with the vehicle capacities.  Using this formulation, a polynomial number of capacity constraints is
sufficient (in contrast to an exponential number of constraints with alternative models).  Finally,
Eq. (16) and (17) are the integrality constraints.
    The problem is often also formulated with real-valued costs and real-valued demands,  which
only requires the change of y from an integer variable to a continuous variable y∈ R, effectively
leading to a mixed-integer program.  For a more convenient benchmarking setup, we only provide
the integer-based formulation, since it lets us avoid having to consider machine precision for the
instance data, while simultaneously keeping the problem complexity the same.

4.9.3    Instances
A  survey  on  benchmark  data  sets  can  be  found  in  [GKM +21].   All  instances  in  the  repository
are given for k  = 4 vehicles and n = 20 customers and were created to be 100% tight,  i.e.,  the
sum of the demands equals the vehicle capacity Q.  The instances follow the TSPLIB/CVRPLIB
format [LOQ].  We randomly generated and solved several thousand instances, selecting those that
took the longest to solve,  which is still only seconds on modern digital systems.  Out of the set
of  problem  sizes  considered,  the  chosen  instances  are  among  the  most  difficult.   It  has  proven
unexpectedly hard to find small-to-medium instances that are primal difficult.  Classical methods
solve these sizes quickly, see [UPP +17,GKM      +21].  This indicates that quantum approaches would
have to be extremely fast to be competitive on these problems in the near term.  We plan to add
and investigate larger instances in the future.


                                                              32
                       4.9.4    Classical Baseline
                       It should be noted that numerous open-source codes for VRP are available, e.g., [LKH,goo,HGS],
                       with some even utilizing GPU acceleration [cuO].  Additionally, several companies offer specialized,
                       highly  optimized  solvers  for  this  problem;  however,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  their  performance.
                       Furthermore, they are tailored to real-world scenarios, which, for example, include multiple vehicle
                       classes and driver break times.
                            Table8shows the optimal cost and the average time taken by HGS-CVRP [HGS,Vid22] to find
                       this solution, measured over 10 runs with different seeds and a time limit of 10 seconds.  Notably,
                       the optimal solution could not be found within this limit, for instance, 21.  However, given that
                       HGS-CVRP takes only a few milliseconds to find an optimal solution for typical instances with
                       n = 20, we expect it to be found within a marginally longer time limit.  The optimal solutions were
                       certified using VRPSolver [EQSU23,PSUV20,VRPa,VRPb].

                         No    Cost    Time (s)                         No    Cost    Time (s)                        No    Cost    Time (s)
                          01      646            1.74                   21      842   >10.00                           41      736            1.33
                          02      650            0.33                   22      760            0.98                    42      998            1.30
                          03      508            1.30                   23      851            2.84                    43      465            1.95
                          04      776            1.64                   24      725            0.82                    44      973            1.11
                          05      702            1.01                   25      462            0.49                    45    1071            5.10
                          06      690            0.85                   26      688            1.01                    46      812            0.79
                          07      730            0.82                   27      540            1.40                    47      583            0.54
                          08      718            0.65                   28      669            2.27                    48      544            1.81
                          09      707            0.88                   29      658            0.94                    49    1045            0.56
                          10      737            0.61                   30      685            0.78                    50      627            0.89
                          11      914            4.48                   31      445            7.16                    51      491            0.91
                          12      709            1.18                   32      882            2.38                    52      622            2.35
                          13      628            0.47                   33      568            0.60                    53      967            7.12
                          14      696            1.44                   34      891            8.51                    54      791            2.12
                          15      780            0.94                   35      707            1.18                    55      617            3.73
                          16      830            3.55                   36      610            2.03
                          17      605            1.03                   37      650            0.81
                          18      997            1.07                   38      991            0.98
                          19      976            2.10                   39      717            5.23
                          20      648            8.71                   40      700            2.16

                       Table 8:  CVRP: Optimal cost values and running times.


                       4.10    Topology Design
                       4.10.1    Background











                            Given a graphG = (V,E), we define three possibly competing objectives.  First, one may want
                       to focus on order such that the number of verticesn =|V| is maximized. Second, one can target the
                       degree, which relates to the minimization of the maximum vertex degree d = maxv∈V δ(v).  Lastly,
                       one may want to minimize the diameter k = maxu,v∈V  length                             of  shortest    path(u,v).  Fixing two
                       parameters  within  the  set {order,  degree,  diameter},  and  optimizing  the  third,  results  in  the
Why is it interesting?following optimization problems:

Several  GraphGolf  competitions  [KFH +15]  over  the  years  have  shown  that  specifically  the•  Order Degree Problem (ODP): minimize the diameter;

Order Degree Problem (ODP) is difficult to solve in practice–although the resulting problem•  Degree Diameter Problem (DDP): maximize the number of vertices;
formulation  can  be  relatively  sparse,  and  a  problem  instance  is  specified  by  providing  just
three integers.  Furthermore, the variables are typically binary, which facilitates the encoding33
of  the  problem  in  a  quantum  system.   The  problem  finds  application  in  computer  network
design [SWS11].
    •  Order Diameter Problem (ODiP): minimize the maximum vertex degree.

Notably, the name of the problem is given by the two fixed parameters.  The ODiP has received
little attention to date.  The DDP has been considered extensively, with the foundations discussed
already in the literature from the 1960s [HS60,CCMS74], and further explored in the 1980s, e.g.,
[Chu86, Chu87].   For  a  comprehensive  survey,  we  refer  the  reader  to  [MS12].   In  this  work,  we
consider the ODP, for which–to our knowledge–an NP-hardness proof is not available in the open
literature.  The ODP arises in the search for network topologies with low latency [SWS11], and a
variety of methodologies for constructing networks with low latency are discussed in the literature
[BH14,SHPG12].  We use the ODP variant employed in the GraphGolf competitions [KFH                                 +15]:
the goal is to solve the ODP, using the average shortest path length (ASPL) as a tie-breaker for
graphs with the same diameter, with lower ASPL being preferred.  This problem is difficult to solve
in practice [KFH +15].

4.10.2    Problem statement
Let ∆(s,t), s,t∈ V  be the shortest distance of two vertices in a simple unweighted graph G =
(V,E).  Given a number n∈ N of vertices, and a maximum vertex degree d∈ N.  We are looking
for a simple graph G = (V,E), V  ={1,...,n}, E⊆{(u,v)∈V×V|u̸=v} with δ(v)≤d, for all
v∈ V , that minimizes maxs,t∈V ∆(s,t).  Multiple formulations for the ODP are possible; for an
overview, we refer to [Wan21].  There is considerable freedom in the choice of how the lengths of
the all-pairs shortest paths are computed.

                                                                            n      d    k    Submitter
        n    d     k                  n    d     k                        512      4    6    EvbCFfp1XB
       15    4    2*                 25    6    2*                        512      6    5    MasakiChujo
       15    3    3*                 30    4    3*                      1024       4    7    EvbCFfp1XB
       20    3    3*                 30    5    3*                      1726     30     3    (random)
       20    4    3*                 30    6     3                      4855     15     4    Teruaki Kitasuka
       20    5    2*                 35    5     4                      9344       6    7    EvbCFfp1XB
       25    3    4*                 35    6     3                     65536       6    9    (random)
       25    4    3*                 40    6    3*                   100000        8    7    Hajime Terao
       25    5    3*                 50    4     5                  1000000      16     6    Teruaki Kitasuka
                                                                    1000000      32     5    (random)

Table 9:  (Topology) Overview of the provided instances and their optimal/best-known solutions.  Proven
optimality is indicated by∗.  The solutions shown in the left and center tables were computed by us using
Gurobi 11.0.0.  and result submissions shown in the right table can be found at [KFH +15].


4.10.3    Instances
The  instances  range  from  15  vertices  and  degree  3  to  106  vertices  and  degree  32.   A  detailed
presentation of the provided instances can be found in Table9.  We provided a program to check
solutions, i.e., given a triple (n,d,k) and a graph, it verifies that the graph hasn nodes, a maximum
degree of d, and a diameter of at most k.

4.10.4    Classical Baseline
Our baseline was computed using Gurobi 11.0.0 on an AMD EPYC-7542 32-core processor using 64
threads with a time limit of 7200s.  In the repository, we provide three different MIP formulations.
The first model uses a standard s-t flow model to compute shortest path values.  The second model
uses Seidel’s quadratic all-pairs shortest path formulation.  The third model is a linearization of
Seidel’s quadratic model.  This problem is hard to model as a compact integer program.  Gaps and
runtimes can be found in Figure16. The results indicate that we can prove optimality only on rather
small instances if we use an MIP solver.  With the provided models, even solving n = 30,d = 6
takes too long.  However, as can be seen on [KFH +15], using heuristic methods, it is possible to
compute solutions to larger instances.







                                                          34
Figure 16:  (Topology)  Absolute MIP gap corresponding to order and degree of the flow (top) / quadratic
(bottom left) and linearized (bottom right) Seidel model.  The size of the points indicates the running time–
the bigger, the longer.  Furthermore, the timeout is set to 7200s.

5    Submission Guidelines and Illustrative Results

The following section presents guidelines for submitting benchmark results to [QOBLIB] and pro-
vides exemplary baseline results for three selected problem classes–Low Autocorrelation Binary Se-
quences, Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition and Independent Set problem–each solved with another
quantum optimization algorithm.  These results can also be found in the [QOBLIB] repository.
    We provide a submission template in Table10which should be submitted together with the dis-
covered solution.  The metrics were chosen to enable a fair and systematic comparison of solutions
and algorithms. More specifically, we ask for the identification of the concrete problem instance and
the submitter(s).  Given that not every detail can be given in a compact form, submissions ideally
refer to a paper or a code repository with further information, such as hyperparameters, additional
hardware specifications, software versions, etc.  Furthermore, the best objective value found (for
optimization problems) as well as the corresponding solution (in addition to the template) should
be given.  If supported by an algorithm, an a posteriori bound on the optimal objective value can
be  provided.   Next,  the  chosen  modeling  approach  should  be  described  (e.g.,  QUBO,  ILP,  etc.)
as well as the resulting number and type of decision variables and (non-zero) coefficients needed
to represent the considered problem instance.  Furthermore, the submission should provide a brief
summary of the complete optimization workflow to facilitate reproducibility.  This includes pre-
processing, pre-solver, main optimization algorithm, and post-processing, as well as an indication
if the algorithm is deterministic or stochastic.  Stochastic algorithms are generally recommended
to be repeated multiple times.  In this case, the number of successful runs that result in feasible
solutions or return solutions close to the best found solutions (cf. Table10for more details) should
be reported.  Lastly, the overall runtime and the runtime spent on the various hardware platforms
should be provided.  In case of multiple repetitions, the average runtime over all repetitions may be
reported.  Additional information, such as the distribution of the runtimes or potential correlations
with solution quality, is encouraged to be described in a corresponding publication or reference.
As discussed in Section3, the runtimes should not include potential queuing times for hardware
access.  For most problems, we provide solution checkers in [QOBLIB].  These should be used to
verify proposed solutions before a benchmark result is submitted to [QOBLIB].

5.1    Low Autocorrelation Binary Sequences
In  the  following,  we  focus  on  tackling  the  LABS  problem  using  the  bias-field  digitized  counter-
diabatic quantum optimization (BF-DCQO) algorithm [isk].  The respective results are compared
with QAOA and various classical optimization algorithms.


                                                           35
 Problem Identifier                     Identifier of the considered problem instance.
 Submitter                              Name(s) of the submitter(s) and affiliation(s).
 Date                                   Date of submission.
 Reference                              Reference to a paper/repository with more details.
 Best Objective Value                   The best objective value found by the algorithm across all repetitions.
 Optimality Bound                       Lower bound (minimization) or upper bound (maximization) for the
                                        optimal objective value, if supported; otherwise, set to N/A.
 Modeling Approach                      Describe how the considered problem instance is modeled.
 #Decision Variables                    Total number of decision variables.
 #Binary Variables                      Number of binary decision variables.
 #Integer Variables                     Number of integer decision variables.
 #Continuous Variables                  Number of continuous decision variables.
 #Non-Zero Coefficients                 Number of non-zero coefficients in objective function and constraints.
 Coefficients Type                      Type of coefficients, such as integer, binary, continuous.
 Coefficients Range                     Range of non-zero coefficients, i.e., min/max values.
 Workflow                               Description of the optimization workflow:  pre-processing, pre-solvers,
                                        machine learning training, optimization algorithms, post-processing, etc.
 Algorithm Type                         Indicate whether the algorithm is deterministic or stochastic.
 #Runs                                  The number of times the experiment has been repeated.
 #Feasible Runs                         The number of times a run found a feasible solution.
 #Successful Runs                       Number of runs that found a feasible solution with objective value
                                        ≤ (1 +ϵ)∗fmin (minimization) or≥ (1−ϵ)∗fmax (maximization),
                                        where fmin/max is the best solution found by the algorithm.
 Success Threshold                      The threshold ϵ to define a successful run.
 Hardware Specifications                Specifications of hardware used to run the workflow.
 Total Runtime (Wall-clock)             Total runtime to run the complete workflow.
 CPU Runtime                            CPU runtime to run the workflow.
 GPU Runtime                            GPU runtime to run the workflow.
 QPU Runtime                            QPU runtime to run the workflow.
 Other HW Runtime                       Runtime on other hardware to run the workflow.


Table 10:   The table summarizes the metrics that should be reported when submitting benchmark results
to [QOBLIB].  All                  runtimes should be reported as average  if multiple algorithm runs were executed.























Figure 17:  (LABS) Comparison of the time-to-solution for LABS instance ranging from size 10 to 30
using BF-DCQO and QAOA across different numbers of layers: p = 1, p = 4, p = 8, and p = 12.  The
data for QAOA is sourced from [SLC +24].  Note that the BF-DCQO times reflect idealized QPU runtime
estimates, excluding transpilation.


    The quantum adiabatic algorithm (QAA) evolves an easily prepared ground state of an initial
HamiltonianHi to the unknown ground state of a target HamiltonianHf, which should correspond
to the optimal solution of an optimization problem of interest.  This evolution is described by a



                                                            36
time-dependent Hamiltonian of the form

                                         Had(t) = [1−λ(t)]Hi +λ(t)Hf ,                                             (18)

whereλ(t)∈ [0, 1] guides the adiabatic path.  The corresponding time evolution can be discretized
and run on a digital quantum computer.  In QAA, the system remains in the instantaneous ground
state  in  the  limit ∂tλ(t)→  0.   In  the  digitized  counterdiabatic  quantum  optimization  (DCQO)
protocol counterdiabatic terms are added to the time-dependent Hamiltonian of Eq. (18)  [HPD        +21,
CHP+22,HCS22], which becomes

                                             Hcd =Had(t) +∂tλ(t)Aλ.

Here,Aλ is the adiabatic gauge potential [KSMP17], which may be obtained or approximated in dif-
ferent ways [CPSP19,HT21].  The additional counterdiabatic term aims to suppress non-adiabatic
transitions  that  move  the  state  away  from  the  instantaneous  ground  state.   Hence,  approaches
based on counterdiabatic terms can improve solution quality [CHP +22,CDS      +24].
    An extension of DCQO is bias-field DCQO (BF-DCQO), which is an iterative algorithm [CDS +24,
RVC+24,isk].  In BF-DCQO, the information from the final evolved state is fed back as a bias
for a new initial state, such that the initial Hamiltonian for another DCQO iteration is adapted
accordingly.   In  addition  to  that,  we  consider  a  classical  post-processing  scheme  where  we  per-
form a local search [DEH +23,DSE      +24,WSW24] on the        nkeep  lowest energy bitstrings obtained
from BF-DCQO at each iteration.  This local search can be seen as a zero-temperature simulated
annealing with ns sweeps.
    We conduct classical statevector simulations of quantum circuits from BF-DCQO for sequence
lengths up to n = 30 using Qiskit 1.1.1, NumPy 2.0.2, and SciPy 1.14.1.  We consider a maximum
of 10 iterations, and nkeep was set to 50% of the measured states at each iteration.  Furthermore,
ns  = 5 sweeps were performed on each bitstring.  In the context of these simulation results,  we
predict QPU execution times by making optimistic assumptions, i.e., that one shot on quantum
hardware  takes  2· 10−4  seconds,  and  the  classical  post-processing  requires∼  10−7  seconds  per
sweep (for 30 qubits), based on the measured resources on an Apple M2 Pro chip.  In Figure17, we
present the scaling of the time to measure the optimal solution for the classically simulated BF-
DCQO combined with greedy classical post-processing for different sequence lengths.  Additionally,
we show the time-to-solution of QAOA with different numbers of layersp based on [SLC +24].  The
time-to-solution is defined as τ log(1− 0.99)/ log(1−pgs) with τ  the execution time per shot, pgs
is the success probability of finding the optimal solution, and the ratio log(1− 0.99)/ log(1−pgs)
accounts for the number of shots required to measure the optimal solution at least once with 99%
probability.   We  emphasize  that  the  reported  runtimes  for  BF-DCQO  were  calculated  based  on
early  termination  once  the  ground  state  was  reached,  rather  than  running  all  10  iterations.   In
most cases, the ground state was obtained within 3 iterations; however, for cases beyond 28 qubits,
up to 7 iterations were required.  If we choose not to terminate after reaching the ground state, the
success probability continues to be amplified by the bias field in successive iterations, contributing
to  a  further  reduction  in  the  overall  time-to-solution.   Additionally,  termination  criteria  can  be
defined by setting a threshold on the energy difference between successive iterations.  Note that
the BF-DCQO circuit requires as many entangling gates as QAOA (p = 2).  In the studied range
of system sizes, BF-DCQO scales better than QAOA (p = 1, p = 4) and is comparable to QAOA
(p = 8, p = 12).  Additionally, the scaling is also better with respect to exact classical solvers like
Gurobi and CPLEX [SLC +24], as shown in Figure18.
    To test the performance experimentally, we selected the LABS problem with a sequence length
ofn = 20, which exceeds the largest LABS problem implemented on a quantum computer to date
(i.e.n = 18 [SLC +24]), and present the results in the submission format introduced in Table10in
Table12.
    Since the Hamiltonian corresponding to LABS is dense with both 2-local and 4-local terms,
its  realization  is  challenging  due  to  the  large  number  of  entangling  gates  required.   Therefore,
we  restrict  the  counterdiabatic  terms  to  include  only  2-local  terms.    We  used  the  156-qubit
ibm  marrakesh device with optimization  level  2 transpilation, dynamical decoupling based on
an XpXm sequence, and Qiskit 1.3.1.  To facilitate the experimental implementation, we adopted
the following strategy for initializing the bias fields.  First, we created a random bitstring and ap-
plied a local greedy search withns = 5.  Then, we use the resulting bitstring to compute the initial
bias fields.  We set the initial number of shots to nshots = 500 and ns = 2.  The nkeep parameter is
chosen as 50% andnshots is increased by 500 after each iteration.  In Table11, we present the results
for ten different bias-field initializations.  For the selected set of parameters, all the initializations
resulted in a non-zero success probability.  Then = 20 LABS problem has an eight-fold degenerate


                                                            37
Figure 18:  (LABS) Comparison of the time-to-solution for BF-DCQO, Gurobi, and CPLEX. The data
for the classical optimizers was sourced from [SLC +24].  Note that the BF-DCQO times reflect idealized
QPU runtime estimates, excluding transpilation.

        Run  pgs     Total Runtime (s)    Pre-Proc.  (s)    QPU Runtime (s)    Post-Proc.  (s)
          1       0.10              32.23                     0.213                       32                         0.01
          2       0.23              32.25                     0.241                       32                         0.01
          3       0.37              32.23                     0.216                       32                         0.01
          4       0.45              32.24                     0.226                       32                         0.01
          5       0.10              32.24                     0.225                       32                         0.01
          6       0.25              96.68                     0.665                       96                         0.01
          7       0.49              64.44                     0.427                       64                         0.01
          8       0.13              64.42                     0.408                       64                         0.01
          9       0.08              128.87                    0.854                      128                        0.01
         10      0.12              96.64                     0.630                       96                         0.01

Table 11:  (LABS)  Summary of results for ten experimental trials of BF-DCQO on the sizen = 20 LABS
problem executed on ibm          marrakesh.  The overall runtime consists of pre-processing time, which includes
circuit construction and transpilation, QPU runtime, which includes the payload circuit preparation and
execution  time,  and  post-processing  time,  which  includes  the  local  search  post-processing.   Further pgs
shows the probability of sampling the best solution–here the optimal one.


ground state, which can be divided into two distinct independent groups based on spin-flip and
reflection symmetry.  In our results, we measure optimal sequences from both groups.  The average
overall runtime to measure the optimal solution was 61.2 seconds.  However, excluding the payload
quantum circuit preparation, the average runtime becomes 9.1 seconds, which is still better than
the two exact classical methods shown in Figure18.
    In summary, this section presents a benchmarking study of BF-DCQO against CPLEX, GUROBI,
and QAOA for the LABS problem with sequence lengths of up to 30.  Our empirical results demon-
strate  that  BF-DCQO’s  runtime  scaling  to  reach  the  optimal  solution  is  comparable  to  that  of
QAOA withp = 12 layers, while requiring six times fewer entangling gates.  Prior empirical studies
have  shown  that  QAOA  with p  =  12  outperforms  the  best-known  classical  approach,  Memetic
Tabu Search,  by simulating sequence lengths of up to n = 40.  Nevertheless,  further research is
needed to systematically assess whether BF-DCQO can ultimately achieve a definitive quantum
speedup over state-of-the-art classical methods.

5.2    Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition
The following section presents a quantum variational algorithm for the Minimum Birkhoff Decom-
position problem,  which looks for a decomposition of an n×n doubly stochastic matrix with k
permutation matrices, where k is as small as possible.  The solutions found with state-of-the-art
classical solvers are given in Section4.3.4.



                                                                 38
 Problem Identifier                 LABS (n = 20)
 Submitter                          Narendra N. Hegade (Kipu Quantum),
                                    Alejandro Gomez Cadavid (Kipu Quantum, UPV/EHU).
 Date                               January 20, 2025
 Reference                          [LAB]
 Best Objective Value               26 (optimal)
 Optimiality Bound                  N/A
 Modeling Approach                  HUBO
 #Decision Variables                20
 #Binary Variables                  20
 #Integer Variables                 0
 #Continuous Variables              0
 #Non-Zero Coefficients             90+525 (quadratic + quartic terms)
 Coefficients Type                  integer
 Coefficients Range                 {2, 4}
 Workflow                           Each iteration of the algorithm calls:
                                    1) Sampling with BF-DCQO
                                    2) Local search sweeps
 Algorithm Type                     Stochastic
 #Runs                              10
 #Feasible Runs                     10 (unconstrained problem)
 #Successful Runs                   10
 Success Threshold                  0 (requiring optimal solutions)
 Hardware Specifications            CPU: Apple M2 Pro, QPU: ibm          marrakesh.
 Total Runtime                      61.22s
 CPU Runtime                        0.42s
 GPU Runtime                        N/A
 QPU Runtime                        60.80s
 Other HW Runtime                   N/A


Table 12:  (LABS) Report of benchmark submission for the LABS instance with n = 20, also available in
[QOBLIB].  All runtimes are reported as the average over the 10 runs.


    The variational quantum algorithm considered here aims to solve the following problem
                                                               "D−  kX      2#
                                minimize                                    ciPi                                 (19)
                                θ∈[0,2π]m            E(P1,...,Pk)∼P(θ)  i=1

where (P1,...,Pk) is a collection ofk different permutation matrices drawn from a parameterized
distributionP(θ),  and (c1,...,ck) are weights such that Pki=1ci  = 1.  The distributionP(θ) is
prepared  with  a  parameterized  quantum  circuit  where θ  :=  (θ1,...,θm)∈  [0, 2π]m  controls m
circuit gates.  The variational algorithm runs for a sequence of iterations where θ  is updated in
each iteration to minimize the cost function E[∥D−Pki=1ciPi∥2].  The cost function is computed in
two steps.  First, we sample a collection ofk different permutation matrices with a quantum circuit
(main permutation sampling) and then compute the weights classically (black-box optimization).
    To  sample k  permutation  matrices,  we  use  a  quantum  circuit  with  four  layers.   Each  layer
consists of RY(θj) gates (j∈{1,...,m}) on every qubit and a CZ pairwise entanglement where
qubiti is entangled with qubiti+1 for all even values ofi, and then a second layer where qubiti is
entangled with qubit i + 1 for all odd values ofi.  We can encodek different permutation matrices
as a bit string as follows.  First, we write a permutation matrix as a sequence of integers using the
Lehmer code [Leh60], and then map the sequence to a             unique  integer in{1,...,n!}.  That is, an
integer{1,...,n!} corresponds to a permutation matrix.  The next step is to map k permutation
matrices (i.e., integers) to a unique integer using the combinatorial number system [SFT16 n!⌉ qubits, where n! is the number of all possible solutions—].  The
resulting encoding requires⌈log2         k                        k
i.e., all possible combinations of k permutations.  For example, with n = 4 and k = (n− 1)2 + 1, = 1, 961, 256 different permutation combinations and the encoding requires
there are a total of 4!10                                                    ≈ 1.9·1020 different permutation
21 qubits. Similarly, withk = (n−1)2+1 andn = 5, there are 5!17
combinations and we require 68 qubits.  The encoding process described can be reversed to map n! may
a bit string back to a unique collection of k permutation matrices.  However, since log2                     k


                                                          39
Figure 19:  (Birkhoff)   Quantum simulation  (top) hardware  (bottom) results for n = 4 (left) and n = 5
(right).  The error markers with 10−12 error indicate an exact decomposition (i.e., zero error).  The x-axis
indicates  the  problem  instance  BX     sparse/dense    Z,  where  X  is  the  size  of  the  doubly  stochastic  matrix
(i.e.,n), sparse/dense is the number of permutations used to generate the doubly stochastic matrix (n for
sparse and n2 for dense), and Z is the instance number.


not  be  an  integer,  some  bit  strings  may  not  correspond  to  permutation  combinations.   Thus,  if
the quantum circuit returns a non-valid bit string, we replace this with a valid bit string selected
uniformly at random.
    In the experiments presented below, we employed Optuna 4.1 [ASY +19] as a black-box solver
for Eq. (19) to optimize the parameters   θ. After sampling the permutation matrices, the coefficients
c1,...,ck are computed classically in two steps.  In the first step (black-box step 1 ), we use CPLEX
22.1.1 [cpl25] to minimize   ∥sD−Pki=1uiPi∥2  with respect to ui∈{0, 1, 2,...,s} subject to 0≤
ui≤ s and Pki=1ui  = s where s is a given integer in the dataset that makes sD  and interger-
valued  matrix.   In  the  second  step  (black-box  step  2 ),  we  use  again  CPLEX  22.1.1  to  find  the
coefficients ci ∈  [0, 1]  that  provide  the  smallest  decomposition  subject  to∥D−PkPk                 i=1ciPi∥2 ≤
∥D− 1s      i=1uiPi∥2 andPki=1ci = 1.  Further details about the data encoding and the algorithmic
flow of this variational quantum algorithm can be found in AppendixD.
    We benchmark the variational algorithm using Qiskit 1.3.1 [JATK +24] with a simulator (    Qiskit
Aer MPS) and actual quantum hardware (ibm                   cusco).  All classical execution steps were run on a
MacBook Pro (M1 Max CPU and 32 GB RAM). Each run of the algorithm consists of 10 iterations,
where each iteration involves drawing 1024 shots from the quantum computer and hyperparameter
optimization of the respective coefficients with a black-box solver, as explained above.  We run the
algorithm once for all instances with size n = 4 and n = 5, and present a performance summary
in Figures19.  Recall from Section4.3.3that there are 10 instances per matrix size and density
(sparse/dense)  and  that  sparse/dense  matrices  are  generated  by  sampling,  respectively, n  and
n2  permutation matrices and weights uniformly at random.  Furthermore,  Table13presents an
example of a submission for a particular problem instance (B5                    5  8) where we run the algorithm
10 times.
    Figure19shows  the  simulation  and  hardware  results  for       n  =  4  and n  =  5  with  sparse  and
dense matrices; the dots indicate the number of permutations in the decomposition (left y-axis),
and  the  squares/crosses  represent  the  decomposition  error  (right  y-axis).   The  x-axis  indicates
the problem instance BX          Y  Z, where X is the size of the doubly stochastic matrix (i.e., n), Y is
the number of permutations used to generate the doubly stochastic matrix (n for sparse and n2
for dense),  and Z is the instance number.  Observe from both figures that when n = 4 and the
target matrix is sparse, the variational algorithm can consistently obtain sparse decompositions of
length 3 and 4.  For both simulation and hardware results, the solutions coincide with the solution



                                                            40
obtained  with  CPLEX  except  for  one  instance  (B4            4  9;  simulation),  where  the  decomposition
length  is  5  instead  of  4  (CPLEX).  Also,  the  decomposition  is  exact  for  all  instances  (i.e.,  zero
error).   With n  =  4  and  a  dense  target  matrix,  the  performance  remains  similar  to  the  sparse
case.   Finally,  with n  =  5,  the  performance  degrades  significantly  compared  to  the n  =  4  case,
with only a few instances reaching sparse decompositions with decomposition errors below 10−10.
Despite  solving  only  a  few  instances,  the  result  is  remarkable  for  a  variational  algorithm  since∼ 190 million combinations of 5 permutation matrices of size 5.  Moreover,  some
there are  5!5
of the decompositions obtained with the variational algorithm are better than the decompositions
obtained with approximate classical algorithms such as Birkhoff+ and Blended FW. For instance,
with instance B5     5  6, Birkhoff+ obtains an exact decomposition of length 7, while the variational
algorithm obtains an exact decomposition of length 5.

 Problem Identifier                 B5   5 8 (n = 5; density:  sparse; instance number:  8)
 Submitter                          Mitsuharu Takeori (IBM Research – Tokyo)
                                    V´ıctor Valls (IBM Research Europe – Dublin)
 Date                               January 30, 2025
 Reference                          AppendixD
 Best Objective Value               5
 Optimality Bound                   N/A
 Modeling Approach                  Quantum black-box optimization with CPLEX evaluated black-box
 #Decision Variables                68 (main) + 17 (black-box step 1) + 34 (black-box step 2)
 #Binary Variables                  68 (main) + 17 (black-box step 2)
 #Integer Variables                 17 (black-box step 1)
 #Continuous Variables              17 (black-box step 2)
 #Non-Zero Coefficients             35 (black-box step 1) + 18 (black-box step 2)
 Coefficients Type                  integer
 Coefficients Range                 [0, 10000] (black-box step 1)
 Workflow                           Each iteration of the variational algorithm calls:
                                    1) Main permutation sampling
                                    2) Black-box optimization step 1
                                    3) Black-box optimization step 2
 Algorithm Type                     Stochastic
 #Runs                              10
 #Feasible Runs                     10
 #Successful Runs                   4 (1st, 2nd, 5th, and 10th run)
 Success Threshold                  10−10
 Hardware Specifications            CPU: Apple M1 Max (Macbook Pro) , QPU: ibm                cusco.
 Total Runtime                      623.8s
 CPU Runtime                        603.7s
 GPU Runtime                        N/A
 QPU Runtime                        20.1s
 Other HW Runtime                   N/A


Table  13:   (Birkhoff)  Report  of  benchmark  submission  for  instance  B5         5 8  (n  =  5;  density:   sparse;
instance number: 8) from the Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition problem collection provided in [QOBLIB].
All runtimes are reported as the average over the 10 different runs.


5.3    Maximum Independent Set
Here, we benchmark standard QAOA [FGG14] on the independent set problem instances defined
by graphs G = (V,E) with|V| = 17 and|V| = 52 variables–see Section4.7.3.  Independent set is
a constrained optimization problem which we can, thus, model as a QUBO by adding a penalty
term
                                            maxx X    xi−λ X          xixj.


                                                 i∈V          (i,j)∈E

Here, λ  is  a  positive  Lagrange  multiplier  to  introduce  the  constraints.   We  convert  this  QUBO
to a Hamiltonian with the variable change xi  = (1−zi)/2 and promote the spin variables zi  to


                                                          41
Pauli-Z  spin operators Zi.  The resulting Hamiltonian has two contributions:  the objective and
the constraints
                                      X                                  X
                       Hobj =−12           Zi,   λHconst =−λ4                  ZiZj−Zi−Zj.
                                      i∈V                              (i,j)∈E

    We neglect the irrelevant constant energy offsets, i.e., terms that are neither linear nor quadratic
in Zi.   These  terms  are|V|/2,  and−λ|E|/4  and  stem  from  the  objective  and  constraints,  re-
spectively.   Therefore,  the  total  cost  function  Hamiltonian  is H  = Hobj +λHconst.   To  produce
bitstrings from the quantum hardware, we sample from a QAOA trial wavefunction|ψ(β,γ)⟩ =
e−iβHMe−iγH′|+⟩.  Here, HM  =Pi∈V Xi  is the standard QAOA mixer. H′  is the cost operator
Hobj +λH′const  used to design the trial wavefunction, and we apply p = 1 repetitions.  Crucially,
H′const may implement only a subset of the constraints inHconst to limit the depth of the quantum
circuit.  We must now optimize the parameters β, γ, and λ.  In a typical QAOA, this is done in
a closed loop with the quantum hardware, which is time and resource-consuming.  Best practices
on how to carefully choose transpilation and error suppression strategies for a QAOA benchmark
execution can be found on Github [Bes].  In our case, we choose to optimize   β, γ, and λ on clas-
sical hardware by evaluating⟨H⟩, which is efficiently possible for a depth-one ansatz [EMW21].
Optimizing λ is a hard task [ARCR +24].  Here, we chose to strike a balance between the impact
of the actual objective part of the Hamiltonian and the constraint part of the Hamiltonian.  This
can be formulated, e.g., as the optimization problem

                                          maxλ    min (⟨Hobj⟩⋆,λ⟨Hconst⟩⋆).

More specifically, we are aiming to find the largest λ, which still gives us the correct solution for
the objective function underlying our problem.  Here, the expectation values⟨·⟩⋆  are taken over
|ψ(β⋆,γ⋆)⟩ with classically evaluated optimal parameters β⋆ and γ⋆ that maximize⟨H⟩ at a fixed
λ.  Notably, β⋆ and γ⋆ are found from the inner optimization

                          maxβ,γ ⟨ψ(β,γ)|Hobj +λHconst|ψ(β,γ)⟩ = maxβ,γ E(β,γ;λ).

It  should  be  noted  that  the  operator  in  the  expectation  value  is  now  the  full  cost  Hamiltonian
H  and not the potentially simplified H′.  The parameters β and γ are optimized with COBYLA,
provided  by  ScipPy.   Crucially,  these  QAOA  parameters  depend  on  the  Lagrange  multiplier λ.
Therefore, the Lagrange multiplier optimization is expressed as

                               maxλ    min (⟨Hobj⟩⋆,⟨H⟩⋆−⟨Hobj⟩⋆) = maxλ F (λ).

We optimize λ by performing a linear scan over the interval [0, 1] and [0, 0.2] for the 17 and 52
qubit instances, respectively, followed by a refinement using COBYLA from SciPy [VGO +20].  The
resulting optimized λ values are 0.528 and 0.119 for the 17 and 52 qubit instances, respectively.

     n     Total Runtime    Pre-Proc.  (s)    QPU Runtime (s)    Post-Proc.  (s)    Best Obj.Val.
                                    (topt.;tcirc)
     17                        77        36 (22; 14)                             41                         0        4 (optimal)
     52                      227      187 (175;12)                             38                         2      13 (optimal)

Table 14:  (Independent Set)   Summary of benchmarking results for mamila-kangaroo and aves-sparrow
stable set instances.  The process was executed once.  The Overall Runtime, reported in seconds, is broken
down into (i) the pre-processing time which includes the time topt to obtain β⋆, γ⋆, λ⋆ and tcirc to create
the quantum circuits, (ii) the QPU runtime which includes the payload quantum circuit preparation and
execution (queuing time is not included), and (iii) the time taken to post-process the samples.

    We would requireλ> 1 to make the lowest energy state ofH correspond to the optimal solution
of the MIS problem. However, we can only afford large values of lambda if we run deep QAOAs with
p> 1 since they have a better resolution than QAOAs with p = 1.  Since hardware noise restricts
us to shallow circuits, we usep = 1 and work with small values ofλ.  Once the optimal parameters
are found, we create a quantum circuit corresponding to|ψ(β⋆(λ⋆),γ⋆(λ⋆);λ⋆)⟩ and sample 1024
candidate  solutions  on  ibm       fez,  a  156  qubit  Heron  R2  superconducting  qubit  processor  [IBM].
These circuits are executed in session mode as this allows us to report the QPU time as the payload
quantum circuit preparation and execution time–as discussed in Section3.3.2.  Finally, the samples


                                                            42
are post-processed by the greedy classical method described in AppendixE. This benchmark was
executed using Numpy 1.23.5, Qiskit 1.2.2, and SciPy 1.11.3, all running on Python 3.11.5.  We
benchmark this approach on stable set instances referred to as mamila kangoroo and aves sparrow
with 17 and 52 variables, which are given in [QOBLIB].  All constraints of the 17-variable instance
are implemented on hardware, i.e., H′const =Hconst.  This requires a total of 308 CNOT gates.  For
the 52-variable instance, we only implement 16.7% of the constraints by allowing three layers of
SWAP gates [WVG +22].  We, therefore, only implement the constraints that can be built up on a
line of qubits on which we apply three layers of SWAP gates as described in Ref. [WVG +22].  The
resulting circuit has a total of 207 CNOT gates.  This keeps the fidelity of the circuit, approximated
by (1−ECZ)nCZ,  above 50%.  Here, ECZ  and nCZ  are the median error per two-qubit CZ gate
and  the  number  of  two-qubit  CZ  gates,  respectively.   With  the  52-variable  instance,  we  do  not
sample any feasible solutions.  However, after the greedy classical post-processing, we obtained the
optimal sample.  The runtime results from the process described above are reported in Table14.  As
expected, most of the runtime is dedicated to optimizing the parameters β, γ, and λ.  We observe
that  60%  and  27%  of  the  post-processed  samples  for  the  17  and  52  decision  variable  problems,
respectively,  are optimal,  see Figure20.  Finally,  Table15presents an example of a submission
report for the 52−variable instance.























Figure 20:  (Independent Set) Cumulative distribution of the objective value corresponding to the samples
for  the  mamila  kangaroo  (top)  and  the  aves  sparrow  (bottom)  problem  instances  before  classical  post-
processing (left) and after post-processing of the quantum samples (right).  The mamila kangaroo problem
is small enough to simulate the QAOA on a classical processor (dashed-dotted line).  The samples from
the ibm  fez  quantum processor are shown as the solid blue line.


6    Conclusion and Discussion

It is widely believed that quantum computers can achieve an advantage over classical computers for
some optimization problem instances in the future. While complexity theory suggests that, for NP-
hard problems, the speed-up for finding provably optimal solutions is in general at most quadratic
[BBBV97,dW23,DH99,GWG21], better quantum approximation algorithms with an exponential
speed-up  [JSW +24]  or  quantum  optimization  heuristics  that  outperform  classical  algorithms  on
certain  instances  may  still  exist.   However,  practical  demonstrations  of  quantum  advantage  in
optimization are still missing.
    To identify problems where quantum advantage might be possible and to track progress toward
achieving it, systematic analysis and benchmarking are key.  To this end, we introduce [QOBLIB],
an open-source quantum optimization benchmarking library.  We present ten classes of combinato-
rial optimization problems with instances of varying size and complexity for benchmarking classical
and quantum optimization algorithms.  Further, we define a reporting standard that ensures re-
producibility and fair comparison while remaining flexible for evaluating different algorithms and
hardware platforms.
    Most problems are challenging for state-of-the-art classical solvers even at moderate size, and
many of them are related to use cases of practical relevance.  The problem classes exhibit diverse
properties,  such  as  different  densities  and  types  of  constraints,  to  enable  the  study  of  different


                                                            43
 Problem Identifier                 aves-sparrow-social.gph
 Submitter                          Daniel J. Egger (IBM Research Europe – Zurich)
 Date                               January 15th, 2025
 Reference                          [QAO]
 Best Objective Value               13
 Optimality Bound                   N/A
 Modeling Approach                  QUBO
 #Decision Variables                52
 #Binary Variables                  52
 #Integer Variables                 0
 #Continuous Variables              0
 #Non-Zero Coefficients             506 (the number of edges in the graph + number of nodes)
 Coefficients Type                  continuous
 Coefficients Range                 [0, 2]
 Workflow                           1) The parameters β and γ of the depth-one QAOA and the
                                       Lagrange multipliers are optimized classically.
                                    2) Samples are drawn from the QPU.
                                    3) Samples from the QPU are classically post-processed.
 Algorithm Type                     Stochastic
 #Runs                              5
 #Feasible Runs                     5
 #Successful Runs                   5
 Success Threshold                  0
 Hardware Specifications            CPU: Intel Core i9-10885H (Levono P1), QPU: ibm            fez.
 Total Runtime                      252s
 CPU Runtime                        192s
 GPU Runtime                        N/A
 QPU Runtime                        60s
 Other HW Runtime                   N/A


Table 15:  (Independent Set) Benchmark submission, for instance aves-sparrow-social from the indepen-
dent set benchmarking problem collection provided in the [QOBLIB] repository.


mathematical formulations and algorithmic approaches.  This is essential for identifying problem
structures suitable for quantum advantage in optimization.
    We provide classical baseline results for all problem classes and quantum baseline results for
selected  ones  to  kick  off  this  effort.   However,  performing  exhaustive  benchmarks  is  a  massive
endeavor  and  can  only  be  achieved  by  the  broader  scientific  community.   Thus,  we  invite  all
researchers interested in advancing (quantum) optimization to investigate the provided problem
instances and submit solutions using algorithms and hardware of their choice.  We also want to
emphasize the importance of improving classical methodologies, amongst other reasons, because
quantum advantage can only be claimed if the best-known classical methods are outperformed.  To
accelerate the overall research, we also encourage researchers to report results for approaches that
did not work well.  To conclude, [QOBLIB] is intended to be a living repository:  novel solutions
will be included on a rolling basis,  and novel problem instances or adaptations of existing ones
may be added as the state-of-the-art evolves.


Acknowledgments
We want to thank Karen Aardal at TU-Delft for providing results for the Market Split instances
using lattice point enumeration and Nils-Christian Kempke at ZIB for providing results by GPU-
accelerated Schroeppel Shamir enumeration.  We would like to thank S´ebastien Designolle at the
Zuse  Institute  Berlin  for  useful  discussions  on  the  Blended  FW  algorithm  used  in  the  classical
benchmarking  of  the  minimum  Birkhoff  decomposition  problem  (Section4.3.4).   We  also  thank
Julien Gacon for valuable discussions and a helpful review, and Takashi Imamichi for assistance
with software issues, sharing his insights, and providing feedback.  Additionally, we are grateful to
Andrew Wack and Paul Nation for insightful conversations about the benchmarking of quantum
algorithms and their feedback on this work.



                                                          44
    Part of the work for this article has been conducted in the Research Campus MODAL funded
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (fund numbers 05M14ZAM,
05M20ZBM,  05M2025).   GN  is  supported  by  ONR  award  #  N000142312585.   YC  would  like
to  acknowledge  the  support  from  the  Quantum  Engineering  Program  project  A-8000339-01-00,
from  the  Ministry  of  Education  Singapore  under  project  A-8000014-00-00,  and  by  the  National
Research Foundation Singapore under its Industry Alignment Fund – Pre-positioning (IAF-PP)
Funding Initiative and the Monetary Authority of Singapore under A-0003504-17-00.  DVB would
like to acknowledge the support of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) [23AXE35N].

































































                                                        45
Author Contributions
This review was written as part of the Quantum Optimization Working Group initiated in July
2023 by IBM Quantum and its partners.
TKo:   Conceptualization,  Software,  Investigation,  Resources,  Data  Curation,  Writing–Original
Draft,  Writing–Review  and  Editing,  Supervision;  DEBN:  Conceptualization,  Writing–Original
Draft, Writing–Review and Editing;  YC: Conceptualization, Investigation, Modeling, Resources,
Writing–Original  Draft;  GC:  Conceptualization,  Writing–Review  and  Editing;  DJE:  Investiga-
tion,  Data  Curation,  Writing–Original  Draft;  RHe:   Investigation,  Resources,  Writing–Original
Draft;  NNH:  Investigation,  Resources,  Writing–Original  Draft;  AGC:  Investigation,  Resources,
Writing–Original Draft; RHu:  Software, Data Curation; TIm:  Investigation, Data Curation; TIt:
Writing–Original Draft;  TKl:  Resources, Writing–Original Draft;  PMX: Writing–Original Draft,
Investigation, Software; NM: Investigation, Data Curation, Writing–Original Draft; JAMB: Writ-
ing  -  Review  and  Editing  ;  KN:  Software,  Investigation;  GN:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,
Software, Investigation, Resources, Data Curation, Writing–Original Draft, Writing–Review and
Editing; COM: Conceptualization, Writing-Review and Editing; JP: Investigation, Resources; MP:
Writing–Original Draft;  AR: Writing–Original Draft,  Investigation;  MS: Software,  Investigation,
Resources,  Data  Curation;  NS:  Software,  Investigation;  MT:  Investigation;  VV:  Methodology,
Software,  Investigation,  Resources,  Data  Curation,  Writing–Original  Draft;  DVB:  Software,  In-
vestigation, Data Curation; SW: Conceptualization, Writing–Original Draft, Writing–Review and
Editing, Supervision;  CZ: Conceptualization, Writing–Original Draft, Writing–Review and Edit-
ing, Supervision

















































                                                          46
A    Building Capabilities via Instance Simplification

The problem instances we propose are challenging to even implement on current quantum comput-
ers due to noise, which limits the circuit depth.  To track the progress of quantum algorithms and
hardware today we therefore need a spectrum of simplified problem instances to observe a quantum
signal.  These instances will often be easy to solve classically.  We propose to generate simplified
QUBOs such that the time-evolution of the corresponding Hamiltonian becomes less difficult.  More
specifically, we consider a line of n qubits which achieves all-to-all connectivity with a SWAP net-
work withn−2 layers of SWAP gates [WVG +22].  Crucially, each entry (  i,j) of the QUBO matrix
can be implemented after d(i,j)∈{0,...,n− 2} layers of SWAP gates.  The distances di,j allow us
to define ann×n mask where entrymi,j(k) is one ifd(i,j)≤k and zero otherwise.  The number of
allowed layersk thus controls the difficulty of implementing exp(−iHC) on hardware.  We simplify
a QUBO matrix with this mask through the mapping Qi,j→ Q′i,j  = mi,j(k)Qi,j.  Crucially, this
only makes sense if the resulting QUBO Q′  remains connected.  In the benchmarking repository,
we provide a code to simplify a QUBO matrix following this procedure.  Crucially, in this process,
the code generates a named field which contains the number of SWAP layers that constrain the
QUBO for traceability.

B    Market Split Classical Results

Fig21shows the results for Gurobi on a 32-core AMD EPYC-7542 processor using 8 cores and
ABS2 [NTI +23] on an A100 SXM4 80GB, respectively, for different sizes of instances with different
parameters m.  ABS2 is very fast for smaller instances, but fails to find solutions within one hour
for instances larger than size m = 6.

C    Market Split Instance Generation

To benchmark solvers, it is essential to generate feasible instances of this problem. A naive approach
is to randomly sample the entries of A from a uniform distribution and compute b accordingly.
However, this approach often results in infeasible instances, which are less useful for benchmarking.
For instances that were too large to be tested, i.e., m≥ 7, we constructed instances as follows:
   1.Generate a Random Solution Vector: Create a random solution vector  x where approximately
      half (±2) of the entries are set to 1, and the rest are set to 0.
   2.Generate Matrix  A:  Sample the entries of A uniformly from a specified range D.
   3.Compute the Right-Hand Side  b:  Compute each entry of b as:
                                                        $P             %
                                                   bi =      j∈[n]aij
                                                                2

   4.Adjust for Feasibility:  Ensure the feasibility of the generated instance using the following
      steps for each row:
          •  Step 1:  Repeat until no more improvement is possible:
            Identify a pair of entries in the row where one corresponds to 0 in x and the other to 1.
            Perform a “switch” that reduces the absolute slack of the row as much as possible.
          •  Step 2:  If the row is still not feasible:
            Calculate the slack s for the row.  Set c =  3·numones2      , where num       ones is the number of
            1’s in the row.  Find c pairs of 0 and 1, and adjust the corresponding entries by adding
             s
             c  to the 1’s and subtracting it from the 0’s.
          •  Step 3:  Repeat this adjustment until the row becomes feasible.
      In most cases, only a few switches and adjustments are sufficient to achieve feasibility.

D    Minimum Birkhoff Decomposition
       Quantum Baseline Benchmark – Additional Details

This section presents additional details that facilitate the reproducibility of the quantum baseline
benchmarking results for the minimum Birkhoff decomposition problem presented in Section5.2.


                                                         47
Figure  21:   Distribution  of  solution  times  using  (top)  Gurobi  11.0.0  with  a  time  limit  of  3600s  and
(bottom) ABS2 with a time limit of 600s for instances with different sizes m and coefficients rangeD.  All
trials for m≥ 8 timed out for Gurobi and for m≥ 7 timed out for ABS2.

Model Encoding
The following example illustrates the encoding strategy used in the variational algorithm, which
was employed to generate the results presented in Section5.2.

    Permutation to bistring.  Consider the following 4× 4 permutation matrix
                                                    0    1    0    0
                                                    0    0    1    0.
                                                       1    0    0    0
                                                       0    0    0    1

Recall there are 4! = 24 permutation matrices.  We can write the permutation matrix as an array

                                                      p = [2, 3, 1, 4].

The  Lehmer  code  [Leh60]  maps     p  to  another  array l  where  the i-th  entry  of l  is  equal  to li  =
Pi−1
   j=1 1pj<pi.  That is, li  is equal to the number of values p1,...,pi−1  smaller than pi.  For the
permutation array p = [2, 3, 1, 4], the Lehmer code mapping is

                                                      l = [0, 1, 0, 3].

Next, we can map the Lehmer code to an integer in [0, 4!− 1].  In our example, the mapping of
[0, 1, 0, 3] to an integer is as follows:

                                          0!· 0 + 1!· 1 + 2!· 0 + 3!· 3 = 19,


                                                              48
where 19 corresponds to the bit string 10011.

    Bitstring to Permutation.  Consider the bitstring 10011.  We can map the bit string to the
integer 19, and 19 to the array [0, 1, 0, 3] by reversing the process used above.  Similarly, we can
map [0, 1, 0, 3] to p = [2, 3, 1, 4] and so recover the permutation matrix.  Finally, note that while
we can always map a permutation matrix to a bit string, the inverse is not always possible.  An
example is the bit string 11111 (31) since there are 24 permutation matrices,  and the encoding
above maps a permutation matrix to an integer in{0, 1, 2,..., 4!− 1}.  If such a case occurs, we
return a random bit string in the feasible range{0, 1, 2,...,n!− 1}.

    Mapping k  unique  integers  to  an  integer.   Suppose  we  have k  =  4  different  integers
[17, 19, 18, 16],  each  representing  a  unique  permutation  matrix.   Next,  we  order  the  integers  in
ascending order:
                                                  a = [16, 17, 18, 19].
                                                                                                                      ai
Map the integers to a unique integer using the combinatorial number system, i.e., b =Pki=1                              i   .
In our example,
                                      16         17        18         19
                                        1    +     2    +    3    +     4    = 4844.


    Mapping an integer to k unique integers.  Suppose we want to map 4844 tok = 4 unique x
integers.  We start by finding the largest integer x such that                  4   ≤ 4844.  In this case, x is equal
                                                  19                                                          x
to 19.  Repeat the process for 4844−                4    = 968 and k− 1, i.e., find x such that                3    ≤ 968,
which is 18.  Repeating the process until the remainder is zero gives the integers [19, 18, 17, 16].

Ansatz and black-box optimization
The  variational  part  of  the  algorithm  samples  bit  strings  using  the  following  variational  circuit
(Qiskit 1.3.1):

ansatz   =   n_local (
      num_qubits   =   n,
      rotation_blocks   =   "ry",
      entanglement_blocks   =   ’cz ’,
      entanglement   =   ’pairwise ’,
      reps   =   4
      )
    Furthermore, the optimization of the parameters is carried out with Optuna 4.1 [ASY +19] with
the CMAES sampler.  There are a total of 10 optimization rounds/iterations, where each round
measures  1024  shots  with  the  quantum  hardware  or  simulator,  respectively.   For  each  shot,  the
black-box  computes  the  objective  value  as  described  in  Section5.2.   Recall  that  the  black-box
optimization takes as an input a collection of k permutation matrices, the target matrix D, and
an integer s such that sD is integer-valued.  The following is a Python (3.10) implementation of
the black-box optimization using CPLEX (22.1.1):
       # #########   Black - box   optimization   input      ##########
      A   #   $n ^2   \ times   k$   matrix   where   columns   are   permutation   matrices
      b   #   Target   permutation   matrix   as   column   vector
      scale   #   integer   that   makes   A   *   scale   an   integer   matrix
      k   #   maximum   decomposition   length

      # #########   Black - box   optimization :   STEP   1   ##########

      model   =   Model ()
      w   =   model . integer_var_list (A. shape [1])

      #   add   constraints
      model . add_constraint (
            model .sum(w[ index ]   for   index   in   range (0,A. shape [1]))   ==   scale )
      for   i   in   range (0,A. shape [1]):
            model . add_constraint (w[i]   >=   0)
      for   i   in   range (0,A. shape [1]):
            model . add_constraint (w[i]   <=   scale )



                                                             49
      #   add   objective
       model . minimize ( model . sum_squares (
             ( model . sum (A[i,j]*w[j]   for   j   in   range (0,A. shape [1]))   -   b[i])
                           for   i   in   range (0,A. shape [0])))

      #   solve
       solution   =   model . solve ()
      sol   =   solution . get_value_list (w)

      #   compute   error      for   step   2
       dense_val   =   np. linalg . norm (A   @   sol   -   b ,2)

      # #########   Black - box   optimization :   STEP   2   ##########
       model   =   Model ()
      w   =   model . continuous_var_list (k)
      y   =   model . binary_var_list (k)
      p   =   np. asarray ((P. flatten ()))[0]

      #   add   constraints
       model . add_constraint ( model . sum (w[ index ]
             for   index   in   range (0,k))   ==   1)
      for   i   in   range (0,k):
             model . add_constraint (w[i]   >=   0)
      for   i   in   range (0,k):
             model . add_constraint (w[i]   <=   1)
      for   i   in   range (0,k):
             model . add_constraint (w[i]   <=   y[i])

      #   add   objective
       model . add_constraint (( model . sum_squares (
             ( model . sum (w[j]*p[i   +   j*n*n]   for   j   in   range (0,k))   -   b[i])
                           for   i   in   range (0,n*n )))   <=   dense_val )
       model . minimize ( model . sum (y[i]   for   i   in   range (0,k )))

      #   solve
       solution   =   model . solve ()

Solution for the submission in Table13
The doubly stochastic matrix in instance B5                       5 8 is:
                                         0.0143    0.6351    0.0488     0.151     0.1508
                                         0.7859    0.1998        0        0.0143        0         .
                                  D =          0            0         0.151     0.1508    0.6982
                                            0.151     0.1508    0.6494    0.0488        0
                                            0.0488    0.0143    0.1508    0.6351     0.151

The decomposition obtained in the four successful runs is:

                          1    0    0    0    0                 0    1    0    0    0                 0    0    0    0    1
                          0    0    0    1    0 + 0.63511    0    0    0    0 + 0.15081    0    0    0    0
         D = 0.0143         0    0    0    0    1                   0    0    0    0    1                   0    0    0    1    0
                            0    0    1    0    0                   0    0    1    0    0                   0    1    0    0    0
                          0    1    0    0    0                 0    0    0    1    0                   0    0    1    0    0
                            0    0    0    1    0                   0    0    1    0    0
                          0    1    0    0    0 + 0.04880    1    0    0    0.
               + 0.151      0    0    1    0    0                   0    0    0    0    1
                            1    0    0    0    0                   0    0    0    1    0
                            0    0    0    0    1                   1    0    0    0    0

    The  decomposition  length  obtained  with  the  variational  quantum  algorithm  coincides  with
the  decomposition  length  found  with  the  integer  program  formulation  solved  with  CPLEX  (see
formulation in Section4.3.4).







                                                                     50
E    Maximum Independent Set Classical Post-processing

Here, to keep the paper self-contained, we provide the classical algorithm with which the samples
drawn from the quantum computer are post-processed in the maximum independent set benchmark.
Algorithm1first makes  a given sample        x  feasible by  removing nodes from  the independent set
until all the constraints are satisfied.  Second, Algorithm1adds nodes back into the independent
set as long as they do not introduce any violations of the constraints.

Algorithm 1  Greedy post-processing of candidate solutions x to make x feasible, i.e., an inde-
pendent set, and enlarge the set while remaining feasible.
Require:  candidate solution x∈{0, 1}n
  v← compute      violations(x)          ▷ map vertex to the number of constraints it violates
  c←V                             ▷ c are vertices we try to add to the stable set

  while sum(v.values()) > 0 do                                ▷ Make x feasible
      vmax← vertex that violates the largets number of constraints
      x[vmax]← 0
      c.remove(vmax)
      v← compute      violations(x)
  end while

  while len(c)> 0 do                ▷ Add vertices to the stable set and remain feasible
      u←c.pop()
      x′←x
      x′[u]← 1
      if  isfeasible(x′) then
          x←x′
      end if
  end while
  return x







































                                                      51
References

    [AAA+24]Amira  Abbas,  Andris  Ambainis,  Brandon  Augustino,  Andreas  B¨artschi,  Harry
                  Buhrman,  Carleton  Coffrin,  Giorgio  Cortiana,  Vedran  Dunjko,  Daniel  J.  Eg-
                  ger,  Bruce  G.  Elmegreen,  Nicola  Franco,  Filippo  Fratini,  Bryce  Fuller,  Julien
                  Gacon,  Constantin  Gonciulea,  Sander  Gribling,  Swati  Gupta,  Stuart  Hadfield,
                  Raoul Heese, Gerhard Kircher, Thomas Kleinert, Thorsten Koch, Georgios Korpas,
                  Steve  Lenk,  Jakub  Marecek,  Vanio  Markov,  Guglielmo  Mazzola,  Stefano  Mensa,
                  Naeimeh Mohseni, Giacomo Nannicini, Corey O’Meara, Elena Pe˜na Tapia, Sebas-
                  tian  Pokutta,  Manuel  Proissl,  Patrick  Rebentrost,  Emre  Sahin,  Benjamin  C.  B.
                  Symons, Sabine Tornow, V´ıctor Valls, Stefan Woerner, Mira L. Wolf-Bauwens, Jon
                  Yard, Sheir Yarkoni, Dirk Zechiel, Sergiy Zhuk, and Christa Zoufal. Challenges and
                  opportunities in quantum optimization.  Nature Reviews Physics, October 2024.

     [AAPS24]Arturo  Acuaviva,  David  Aguirre,  Rub´en  Pe˜na,  and  Mikel  Sanz.   Benchmarking
                  quantum computers:  Towards a standard performance evaluation approach, 2024.
    [ABCC03]David Applegate, Robert Bixby, Vaˇsek Chv´atal, and William Cook.  Implementing
                  the Dantzig-Fulkerson-Johnson Algorithm for Large Traveling Salesman Problems.
                  Mathematical programming, 97:91–153, 2003.

    [ABCG17]Martin  Anthony,  Endre  Boros,  Yves  Crama,  and  Aritanan  Gruber.   Quadratic
                  reformulations  of  nonlinear  binary  optimization  problems.      Math.   Program.,
                  162(1–2):115–144, March 2017.

    [ABH+00]Karen Aardal, Robert E. Bixby, Cor A. J. Hurkens, Arjen K. Lenstra, and Job W.
                  Smeltink.  Market split and basis reduction:  Towards a solution of the cornu´ejols-
                  dawande instances.  INFORMS Journal on Computing, pages 192–202, 2000.

      [ABW02]Andrew P Armacost, Cynthia Barnhart, and Keith A Ware.  Composite variable
                  formulations for express shipment service network design.  Transportation science,
                  36(1):1–20, 2002.

      [AKT08]Tobias  Achterberg,  Thorsten  Koch,  and  Andreas  Tuchscherer.   On  the  effects  of
                  minor  changes  in  model  formulations.   Technical  Report  08-29,  ZIB,  Takustr.  7,
                  14195 Berlin, 2008.

  [ARCR+24]Edoardo Alessandroni,  Sergi Ramos-Calderer,  Ingo Roth,  Emiliano Traversi,  and
                  Leandro Aolita.  Alleviating the quantum Big-M  problem, 2024.

        [Aro96]Sanjeev Arora. Polynomial time approximation schemes for euclidean tsp and other
                  geometric problems. In Proceedings of 37th Conference on Foundations of Computer
                  Science, pages 2–11. IEEE, 1996.

     [ASY+19]Takuya  Akiba,  Shotaro  Sano,  Toshihiko  Yanase,  Takeru  Ohta,  and  Masanori
                  Koyama.   Optuna:   A  next-generation  hyperparameter  optimization  framework.
                  In  Proceedings  of  the  25th  ACM  SIGKDD  international  conference  on  knowledge
                  discovery & data mining, pages 2623–2631, 2019.

     [AVKS98]Pankaj  K  Agarwal,  Marc  Van  Kreveld,  and  Subhash  Suri.   Label  placement  by
                  maximum  independent  set  in  rectangles.   Computational  Geometry,  11(3-4):209–
                  218, 1998.

         [AZ10]Doron Avramov and Guofu Zhou.  Bayesian Portfolio Analysis.             Annual Review of
                  Financial Economics, 2(1):25–47, 2010.

    [BBBV97]Charles  H  Bennett,   Ethan  Bernstein,   Gilles  Brassard,   and  Umesh  Vazirani.
                  Strengths and weaknesses of quantum computing.   SIAM  journal  on  Computing,
                  26(5):1510–1523, 1997.

     [BBD+22]Sebastian Brandhofer, Daniel Braun, Vanessa Dehn, Gerhard Hellstern, Matthias
                  H¨uls, Yanjun Ji, Ilia Polian, Amandeep Singh Bhatia, and Thomas Wellens. Bench-
                  marking the performance of portfolio optimization with qaoa.  Quantum Informa-
                  tion Processing, 22(1):25, 2022.



                                                          52
[BBDvdB+20]Thomas Bartz-Beielstein, Carola Doerr, Daan van den Berg, Jakob Bossek, Sowmya
                  Chandrasekaran, Tome Eftimov, Andreas Fischbach, Pascal Kerschke, William La
                  Cava, Manuel Lopez-Ibanez, Katherine M. Malan, Jason H. Moore, Boris Naujoks,
                  Patryk Orzechowski, Vanessa Volz, Markus Wagner, and Thomas Weise.  Bench-
                  marking in Optimization:  Best Practice and Open Issues, 2020.

     [BBS+24]David E Bernal Neira, Robin Brown, Pratik Sathe, Filip Wudarski, Marco Pavone,
                  Eleanor G Rieffel, and Davide Venturelli. Benchmarking the operation of quantum
                  heuristics and ising machines:  scoring parameter setting strategies on optimization
                  applications.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10255, 2024.

    [BCGT98]Daniel Bienstock,  Sunil Chopra,  Oktay G¨unl¨uk,  and Chih-Yang Tsai.  Minimum
                  cost  capacity  installation  for  multicommodity  network  flows.   Mathematical  pro-
                  gramming, 81:177–199, 1998.
       [BDS10]D. Briskorn, A. Drexl, and F. C. R. Spieksma. Round robin tournaments and three
                  index assignments.  4OR-Q J Oper Res, 8:365–374, 2010.

       [BEP05]Cristina  Bazgan,  Bruno  Escoffier,  and  Vangelis  Th.  Paschos.   Completeness  in
                  standard  and  differential  approximation  classes:   Poly-(D)APX-  and  (D)PTAS-
                  completeness.  Theoretical Computer Science, 339(2-3):272–292, 2005.
        [Ber13]Timo Berthold.  Measuring the impact of primal heuristics.               Operations  Research
                  Letters, 41(6):611–614, 2013.

           [Bes]Best     practices     in     quantum     optimization     .                     https://github.com/
                  qiskit-community/qopt-best-practices.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].
        [BG95]Daniel  Bienstock  and  Oktay  G¨unl¨uk.   Computational  experience  with  a  difficult
                  mixedinteger multicommodity flow problem.  Mathematical  programming, 68:213–
                  237, 1995.

    [BGC+23]David Van Bulck, Dries Goossens, Jan-Patrick Clarner, Angelos Dimitsas, George
                  H. G. Fonseca,  Carlos Lamas-Fernandez,  Martin Mariusz Lester,  Jaap Pedersen,
                  Antony E. Phillips, and Roberto Maria Rosati. Which algorithm to select in sports
                  timetabling?, 2023.

        [BH14]Maciej Besta and Torsten Hoefler.  Slim fly:  A cost effective low-diameter network
                  topology. In SC’14:  proceedings of the international conference for high performance
                  computing, networking, storage and analysis, pages 348–359. IEEE, 2014.
     [BHP+25]Federico  Berto,  Chuanbo  Hua,  Junyoung  Park,  Laurin  Luttmann,  Yining  Ma,
                  Fanchen Bu, Jiarui Wang, Haoran Ye, Minsu Kim, Sanghyeok Choi, Nayeli Gast
                  Zepeda,  Andr´e  Hottung,  Jianan  Zhou,  Jieyi  Bi,  Yu  Hu,  Fei  Liu,  Hyeonah  Kim,
                  Jiwoo  Son,  Haeyeon  Kim,  Davide  Angioni,  Wouter  Kool,  Zhiguang  Cao,  Qingfu
                  Zhang,  Joungho Kim,  Jie Zhang,  Kijung Shin,  Cathy Wu,  Sungsoo Ahn,  Guojie
                  Song,  Changhyun  Kwon,  Kevin  Tierney,  Lin  Xie,  and  Jinkyoo  Park.   Rl4co:  an
                  extensive reinforcement learning for combinatorial optimization benchmark, 2025.

         [Bie96]Daniel  Bienstock.   Computational  study  of  a  family  of  mixed-integer  quadratic
                  programming problems.  Mathematical Programming, 74:121–140, 1996.
            [Bir]Code     for     Birkhoff     Decomposition     .                    https://github.com/vvalls/
                  BirkhoffDecomposition.jl.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].

         [Bir46]Garrett Birkhoff.  Tres observaciones sobre el algebra lineal.             Univ. Nac. Tucuman,
                  Ser. A, 5:147–154, 1946.

       [BKS21]T. Berthold, T. Koch, and Y. Shinano. MILP. Try. Repeat. In P. De Causmaecker,
                  E.  ¨Ozcan,  and  G.  Vanden  Berghe,  editors,  Proc.  13th  Int.  Conf.  Pract.  Theory
                  Autom. Timetabling, volume 2, pages 403–411. PATAT, 2021.
         [BL92]Fischer  Black  and  Robert  Litterman.   Global  Portfolio  Optimization.              Financial
                  Analysts Journal, 48(5):28–43, 1992.

    [BMZ+24]Jieyi Bi, Yining Ma, Jianan Zhou, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Yaoxin Wu, and Jie
                  Zhang. Learning to handle complex constraints for vehicle routing problems, 2024.


                                                          53
    [Boe67]A Boehmer.  Binary pulse compression codes.         IEEE Transactions on Information
              Theory, 13(2):156–167, 1967.

[BPTW19]G´abor Braun,  Sebastian Pokutta,  Dan Tu,  and Stephen Wright.  Blended condi-
              tional gradients:  the unconditioning of conditional gradients, 2019.

  [Bru82a]Richard A Brualdi. Notes on the birkhoff algorithm for doubly stochastic matrices.
              Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 25(2):191–199, 1982.

  [Bru82b]Richard A. Brualdi. Notes on the birkhoff algorithm for doubly stochastic matrices.
              Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 25(2):191–199, 1982.

     [BS96]Cynthia Barnhart and Rina R Schneur.  Air network design for express shipment
              service.  Operations Research, 44(6):852–863, 1996.

     [BS11]David B Brown and James E Smith. Dynamic portfolio optimization with transac-
              tion costs:  Heuristics and dual bounds.  Manage.  Sci., 57(10):1752–1770, October
              2011.

   [BSS10]David B Brown, James E Smith, and Peng Sun. Information relaxations and duality
              in stochastic dynamic programs.  Oper. Res., 58(4-part-1):785–801, August 2010.

  [BTN99]A.  Ben-Tal  and  A.  Nemirovski.   Robust  solutions  of  uncertain  linear  programs.
              Operations Research Letters, 25(1):1–13, 1999.

 [BVAV16]Shaileshh Bojja Venkatakrishnan, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Pramod Viswanath.
              Costly circuits, submodular schedules and approximate carath´eodory theorems. In
              Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on Measure-
              ment and Modeling of Computer Science, pages 75–88, 2016.

  [CCH00]Cheng-Shang Chang, Wen-Jyh Chen, and Hsiang-Yi Huang. Birkhoff-von neumann
              input buffered crossbar switches. In Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM 2000. Conference
              on  Computer  Communications.  Nineteenth  Annual  Joint  Conference  of  the  IEEE
              Computer  and  Communications  Societies  (Cat.  No.00CH37064), volume 3, pages
              1614–1623 vol.3, 2000.

   [CCJ90]Brent  N.  Clark,  Charles  J.  Colbourn,  and  David  S.  Johnson.   Unit  disk  graphs.
              Discrete Mathematics, 86(1):165–177, 1990.

[CCMS74]Vinton  G  Cerf,  Donald  D  Cowan,  Ronald  C  Mullin,  and  RG  Stanton.   A  lower
              bound on the average shortest path length in regular graphs.  Networks, 4(4):335–
              342, 1974.

 [CDS+24]Alejandro Gomez Cadavid, Archismita Dalal, Anton Simen, Enrique Solano, and
              Narendra  N.  Hegade.   Bias-field  digitized  counterdiabatic  quantum  optimization,
              2024.

  [CHH22]William  Cook,  Stephan  Held,  and  Keld  Helsgaun.   Constrained  local  search  for
              last-mile routing, 2022.

[CHP+22]P. Chandarana, N. N. Hegade, K. Paul, F. Albarr´an-Arriagada, E. Solano, A. del
              Campo, and Xi Chen.  Digitized-counterdiabatic quantum approximate optimiza-
              tion algorithm.  Phys. Rev. Res., 4:013141, Feb 2022.

   [Chu86]Fan RK Chung. Diameters of communication networks.         AMS Short Course on the
              Mathematics of Information Processing, 34:1–18, 1986.

   [Chu87]Fan RK Chung.  Diameters of graphs:  Old problems and new results.         Congressus
              Numerantium, 60(2):295–317, 1987.

   [Con79]George M Constantinides. Multiperiod consumption and investment behavior with
              convex transactions costs.  Manage. Sci., 25(11):1127–1137, November 1979.

    [CP23]Cyrille   W   Combettes   and   Sebastian   Pokutta.      Revisiting   the   approximate
              carath´eodory problem via the frank-wolfe algorithm.  Mathematical  Programming,
              197(1):191–214, 2023.



                                                     54
    [cpl25]CPLEX.              https://www.ibm.com/products/ilog-cplex-optimization-studio,
             2025.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].

[CPSP19]Pieter  W.  Claeys,  Mohit  Pandey,  Dries  Sels,  and  Anatoli  Polkovnikov.  Floquet-
             engineering counterdiabatic protocols in quantum many-body systems.  Phys. Rev.
             Lett., 123:090602, Aug 2019.

  [CPT18]G´erard  Cornu´ejols,  Javier  Pe˜na,  and  Reha  T¨ut¨unc¨u.                  Optimization  Methods  in
             Finance.  Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2018.

    [CR83]Gary Chamberlain and Michael Rothschild. Arbitrage, Factor Structure, and Mean-
             Variance Analysis on Large Asset Markets.  Econometrica, 51(5):1281–1304, 1983.

      [cuO]Nvidia cuopt / rotuing.  [Online; accessed July-18-2025].

   [CW64]G.  Clarke  and  J.  W.  Wright.   Scheduling  of  vehicles  from  a  central  depot  to  a
             number of delivery points.  Operations Research, 12(4):568–581, 1964.

   [D’a02]Gene D’avolio.  The market for borrowing stock.               Journal  of  financial  economics,
             66(2-3):271–306, 2002.
      [dan]dano3mip.            https://miplib.zib.de/instance_details_dano3mip.html.   [On-
             line; accessed Feb-10-2025].

   [DdJ20]Gautam  K.  Das,  Guilherme  D.  da  Fonseca,  and  Ramesh  K.  Jallu.   Efficient  in-
             dependent set approximation in unit disk graphs.  Discrete  Applied  Mathematics,
             280:63–70, 2020. Algorithms and Discrete Applied Mathematics (CALDAM 2016).

[DEH+23]Maxime Dupont, Bram Evert, Mark J. Hodson, Bhuvanesh Sundar, Stephen Jef-
             frey, Yuki Yamaguchi, Dennis Feng, Filip B. Maciejewski, Stuart Hadfield, M. So-
             haib Alam, Zhihui Wang, Shon Grabbe, P. Aaron Lott, Eleanor G. Rieffel, Davide
             Venturelli, and Matthew J. Reagor.  Quantum-enhanced greedy combinatorial op-
             timization solver.  Science Advances, 9(45):eadi0487, 2023.

  [DGS18]Iain  Dunning,  Swati  Gupta,  and  John  Silberholz.   What  works  best  when?   A
             systematic evaluation of heuristics for Max-Cut and QUBO. INFORMS J. Comput.,
             30(3):608–624, 2018.

 [DGU07]Victor DeMiguel, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Raman Uppal.  Optimal versus naive di-
             versification: How inefficient is the 1/n portfolio strategy?  The Review of Financial
             Studies, 22(5):1915–1953, 12 2007.

   [DH99]Christoph Durr and Peter Hoyer.  A quantum algorithm for finding the minimum,
             1999.
      [dim]DIMACS  Implementation  Challenges.            http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/programs/
             challenge.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].

[DMBS79]Jack  J  Dongarra,  Cleve  Barry  Moler,  James  R  Bunch,  and  Gilbert  W  Stewart.
             LINPACK users’ guide.  SIAM, 1979.

    [DR59]George B Dantzig and John H Ramser. The Truck Dispatching Problem.              Manage-
             ment science, 6(1):80–91, 1959.

[DSE+24]Maxime Dupont, Bhuvanesh Sundar, Bram Evert, David E. Bernal Neira, Zedong
             Peng, Stephen Jeffrey, and Mark J. Hodson.  Quantum Optimization for the Maxi-
             mum Cut Problem on a Superconducting Quantum Computer, 2024.

   [DU16]Fanny Dufoss´e and Bora U¸car.  Notes on birkhoff–von neumann decomposition of
             doubly stochastic matrices. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 497:108–115, 2016.

   [dW81]D. de Werra.  Scheduling in sports.  In P. Hansen,  editor,              Studies  on  graphs  and
             discrete programming, pages 381–395, Amsterdam, 1981. North-Holland.

   [dW23]Ronald de Wolf.  Quantum computing:  Lecture notes, 2023.




                                                     55
[EJBB24]Manal El Jaouhari, Ghita Bencheikh, and Ghizlane Bencheikh.  Exploring the ca-
             pacitated vehicle routing problem using the power of machine learning: A literature
             review.  In Youssef Benadada, Fatima-Zahra Mhada, Jaouad Boukachour, Fatima
             Ouzayd, and Ahmed El Hilali Alaoui, editors,  Proceeding  of  the  7th  International
             Conference  on  Logistics  Operations  Management,  GOL’24,  pages  68–80,  Cham,
             2024. Springer Nature Switzerland.

[EKC+22]Sepehr  Ebadi,  Alexander  Keesling,  Madelyn  Cain,  Tout  T  Wang,  Harry  Levine,
             Dolev Bluvstein, Giulia Semeghini, Ahmed Omran, J-G Liu, Rhine Samajdar, et al.
             Quantum optimization of maximum independent set using Rydberg atom arrays.
             Science, 376(6598):1209–1215, 2022.

  [ELL21]Sourour Elloumi, Am´elie Lambert, and Arnaud Lazare.  Solving unconstrained 0-1
             polynomial programs through quadratic convex reformulation.   Journal  of  Global
             Optimization, 80(2):231–248, 2021.

[EMW21]Daniel  J.  Egger,  Jakub  Mareˇcek,  and  Stefan  Woerner.   Warm-starting  quantum
             optimization.  Quantum, 5:479, June 2021.
[EQSU23]Najib  Errami,  Eduardo  Queiroga,  Ruslan  Sadykov,  and  Eduardo  Uchoa.   VRP-
             SolverEasy:  A Python library for the exact solution of a rich vehicle routing prob-
             lem.  INFORMS Journal on Computing, 36:956–965, 2023.

 [FGG14]Edward  Farhi,  Jeffrey  Goldstone,  and  Sam  Gutmann.   A  quantum  approximate
             optimization algorithm, 11 2014.

[FGL+21]David  Fitzek,  Toheed  Ghandriz,  Leo  Laine,  Mats  Granath,  and  Anton  Frisk
             Kockum.  Applying quantum approximate optimization to the heterogeneous vehi-
             cle routing problem.  Scientific Reports, 14, 2021.

 [FHI+21]Nils Froleyks, Marijn Heule, Markus Iser, Matti J¨arvisalo, and Martin Suda.  Sat
             competition 2020.  Artificial Intelligence, 301:103572, 2021.

[FHK+21]Christoph Fraunholz, Dirk Hladik, Dogan Keles, Dominik M¨ost, and Wolf Ficht-
             ner.  On the long-term efficiency of market splitting in Germany.   Energy  Policy,
             149:111833, 2021.

   [FM23]K. Fujii and T. Matsui.  Solving break minimization problems in mirrored double
             round-robin tournament with QUBO solver, 2023.

      [Fra]Frankwolfe.        https://github.com/ZIB-IOL/FrankWolfe.jl.    [Online;  accessed
             April-3-2025].

    [Fre56]J. E. Freund.  Round Robin Mathematics.           The  American  Mathematical  Monthly,
             63:112–114, 1956.

[FRG+19]Sebastian Feld, Christoph Roch, Thomas Gabor, Christian Seidel, Florian Neukart,
             Isabella  Galter,  Wolfgang  Mauerer,  and  Claudia  Linnhoff-Popien.   A  Hybrid  So-
             lution  Method  for  the  Capacitated  Vehicle  Routing  Problem  Using  a  Quantum
             Annealer.  Frontiers in ICT, 6:13, 2019.

[FRH+22]Jernej  Rudi  Finˇzgar,  Philipp  Ross,  Leonhard  H¨olscher,  Johannes  Klepsch,  and
             Andre Luckow.  Quark:  A framework for quantum computing application bench-
             marking.   In  2022  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Quantum  Computing  and
             Engineering (QCE), pages 226–237, 2022.

  [Gav91]Bezalel Gavish.  Topological design of telecommunication networks-local access de-
             sign methods.  Annals of Operations Research, 33(1):17–71, 1991.

   [GC99]Milind Dawande G´erard Cornu´ejols.  Class of hard small 0-1 programs.              INFORMS
             Journal on Computing, 11:205–210, 1999.

 [GCF99]Bernard Gendron, Teodor Gabriel Crainic, and Antonio Frangioni.  Multicommod-
             ity  capacitated  network  design.   In  Telecommunications  network  planning,  pages
             1–19. Springer, 1999.



                                                     56
      [GD25]Etienne Granet and Henrik Dreyer.  AppQSim:  Application-oriented benchmarks
                for Hamiltonian simulation on a quantum computer, 2025.

  [GHG+21]Ambros  Gleixner,  Gregor  Hendel,  Gerald  Gamrath,  Tobias  Achterberg,  Michael
                Bastubbe,  Timo  Berthold,  Philipp  M.  Christophel,  Kati  Jarck,  Thorsten  Koch,
                Jeff  Linderoth,  Marco  L¨ubbecke,  Hans  Mittelmann,  Derya  Ozyurt,  Ted  Ralphs,
                Domenico Salvagnin, and Yuji Shinano.  MIPLIB 2017:  Data-Driven Compilation
                of the 6th Mixed-Integer Programming Library.  Mathematical Programming Com-
                putation, 13(3):443 – 490, 2021.

       [GJ79]M.R.  Garey  and  D.S.  Johnson.               Computers  and  Intractability:   A  Guide  to  the
                Theory of NP-Completeness.  Freeman, 1979.

    [GKD18]Fred Glover, Gary Kochenberger, and Yu Du. A Tutorial on Formulating and Using
                QUBO Models.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11538, 2018.

  [GKM+21]Aldy Gunawan, Graham Kendall, Barry McCollum, Hsin-Vonn Seow, and Lai Soon
                Lee.  Vehicle routing:  Review of benchmark datasets.  Journal  of  the  Operational
                Research Society, 72(8):1794–1807, 2021.
[GKVdW05]Alexei  A  Gaivoronski,  Sergiy  Krylov,  and  Nico  Van  der  Wijst.   Optimal  portfo-
                lio  selection  and  dynamic  benchmark  tracking.   European  Journal  of  operational
                research, 163(1):115–131, 2005.

      [GM24]Jay  Gambetta  and  Ryan  Mandelbaum.   IBM  Quantum  delivers  on  performance
                challenge made two years ago.   https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/qdc-2024,
                2024.  [Online; accessed January-6-2025].

  [GMS+16]Veronika Grimm, Alexander Martin, Martin Schmidt, Martin Weibelzahl, and Gre-
                gor Z¨ottl.  Transmission and generation investment in electricity markets:  The ef-
                fects of market splitting and network fee regimes.  European Journal of Operational
                Research, 254(2):493–509, 2016.

 [GMW96a]Martin  Gr¨otschel,  Alexander  Martin,  and  Robert  Weismantel.   Packing  Steiner
                trees:  polyhedral investigations.  Mathematical Programming, 72:101–123, 1996.

 [GMW96b]Martin  Gr¨otschel,  Alexander  Martin,  and  Robert  Weismantel.   Packing  Steiner
                trees:  separation algorithms.   SIAM  Journal  on  Discrete  Mathematics,  9(2):233–
                257, 1996.

   [GMW97]Martin  Gr¨otschel,  Alexander  Martin,  and  Robert  Weismantel.   The  Steiner  tree
                packing problem in VLSI design.  Mathematical Programming, 78:265–281, 1997.

         [goo]Google or tools / routing.  [Online; accessed July-18-2025].
      [GP13]Nicolae  Gˆarleanu  and  Lasse  Heje  Pedersen.   Dynamic  trading  with  predictable
                returns and transaction costs.  J. Finance, 68(6):2309–2340, December 2013.

      [GT22]J´erˆome Gava and Julien Turc.  The properties of alpha risk parity portfolios.              En-
                tropy, 24(11), 2022.

      [gur25]Gurobi.              https://www.gurobi.com/solutions/gurobi-optimizer/,  2025.   [On-
                line; accessed April-3-2025].

     [GW95]Michel X. Goemans and David P. Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms
                for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming.   J.
                ACM, 42(6):1115–1145, nov 1995.

   [GWG21]Austin Gilliam, Stefan Woerner, and Constantin Gonciulea. Grover adaptive search
                for constrained polynomial binary optimization.  Quantum, 5:428, apr 2021.

      [Haf80]L.  R.  Haff.   Empirical  Bayes  Estimation  of  the  Multivariate  Normal  Covariance
                Matrix.  The Annals of Statistics, 8(3):586–597, 1980.

     [Hak71]S  Louis  Hakimi.    Steiner’s  problem  in  graphs  and  its  implications.                 Networks,
                1(2):113–133, 1971.



                                                        57
  [HCS22]Narendra N Hegade, Xi Chen, and Enrique Solano. Digitized counterdiabatic quan-
              tum optimization.  Physical Review Research, 4(4):L042030, 2022.

    [Hel17]Keld Helsgaun. An Extension of the Lin-Kernighan-Helsgaun TSP Solver for Con-
              strained  Traveling  Salesman  and  Vehicle  Routing  Problems.    Technical  report,
              Roskilde University, 2017.

     [HGS]HGS-CVRP.            https://github.com/vidalt/HGS-CVRP.  [Online;  accessed March-
              11-2025].

    [HK12]Nam-D˜ung Ho`ang and Thorsten Koch. Steiner tree packing revisited.             Mathematical
              methods of operations research, 76:95–123, 2012.

[HKRV11]S. Held, B. Korte, D. Rautenbach, and J. Vygen.  Combinatorial optimization in
              VLSI  design.   In  V.  Chv´atal,  editor,  Combinatorial  Optimization:   Methods  and
              Applications, pages 33––96. IOS Press, 2011.

[HLH+20]Ayaan  Hossain,  Eriberto  Lopez,  Sean  M  Halper,  Daniel  P  Cetnar,  Alexander  C
              Reis, Devin Strickland, Eric Klavins, and Howard M Salis.  Automated design of
              thousands  of  nonrepetitive  parts  for  engineering  stable  genetic  systems.   Nature
              biotechnology, 38(12):1466–1475, 2020.

[HMCL24]James Holliday, Braeden Morgan, Hugh Churchill, and Khoa Luu. Hybrid Quantum
              Tabu Search for Solving the Vehicle Routing Problem, 2024.

[HNN+20]Ramkumar Harikrishnakumar, Saideep Nannapaneni, Nam H. Nguyen, James E.
              Steck,  and  Elizabeth  C.  Behrman.   A  quantum  annealing  approach  for  dynamic
              multi-depot capacitated vehicle routing problem, 2020.

    [HP23]Camilo  Hern´andez  and  Dylan  Possama¨ı.   Me,  myself  and  I:  A  general  theory  of
              non-Markovian time-inconsistent stochastic control for sophisticated agents.   The
              Annals of Applied Probability, 33(2):1396 – 1458, 2023.

[HPD+21]Narendra  N  Hegade,  Koushik  Paul,  Yongcheng  Ding,  Mikel  Sanz,  Francisco  Al-
              barr´an-Arriagada, Enrique Solano, and Xi Chen.  Shortcuts to adiabaticity in digi-
              tized adiabatic quantum computing.  Physical Review Applied, 15(2):024038, 2021.

    [HS60]Alan J Hoffman and Robert R Singleton.  On Moore graphs with diameters 2 and
              3.  IBM Journal of Research and Development, 4(5):497–504, 1960.

    [HT21]Takuya  Hatomura  and  Kazutaka  Takahashi.    Controlling  and  exploring  quan-
              tum systems by algebraic expression of adiabatic gauge potential.   Phys.  Rev.  A,
              103:012220, Jan 2021.
[HTBP22]Deborah Hendrych, Hannah Troppens, Mathieu Besan¸con, and Sebastian Pokutta.
              Convex  mixed-integer  optimization  with  frank-wolfe  methods.     arXiv  preprint
              arXiv:2208.11010, 2022.

    [HZ21]Stefan  Hougardy  and  Xianghui  Zhong.   Hard  to  solve  instances  of  the  euclidean
              traveling salesman problem.   Mathematical  Programming  Computation,  13:51–74,
              2021.

       [I75]Rosenberg I. Reduction of bivalent maximization to the quadratic case.         Cah. centre
              et. rech. operat., 17(1):71–74, 1975.

     [IBM]IBM  Quantum.   IBM  Quantum  Platform.             https://quantum.ibm.com.   [Online;
              accessed 17-February-2025].

       [isk]Iskay    Quantum    Optimizer    -    A    Qiskit    Function    by    Kipu    Quantum.
              https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/docs.quantum.ibm.com/guides/
              kipu-optimization.  [Online; accessed Feb-20-2025].

      [ITC]International  timetabling  competition  on  sports  timetabling  2021.              https://
              robinxval.ugent.be/ITC2021/index.php.  [Online; accessed 26-March-2025].





                                                      58
     [Jag13]Martin Jaggi.  Revisiting Frank-Wolfe:  Projection-free sparse convex optimization.
               In  Sanjoy  Dasgupta  and  David  McAllester,  editors,  Proceedings  of  the  30th  In-
               ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine
               Learning Research, pages 427–435, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR.

     [Jai91]Raj Jain.              The  Art  of  Computer  Systems  Performance  Analysis:  Techniques  For
               Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation, and Modeling.  Wiley, 04 1991.
[JATK+24]Ali Javadi-Abhari, Matthew Treinish, Kevin Krsulich, Christopher J. Wood, Jake
               Lishman, Julien Gacon, Simon Martiel, Paul D. Nation, Lev S. Bishop, Andrew W.
               Cross, Blake R. Johnson, and Jay M. Gambetta. Quantum computing with Qiskit,
               2024.
   [JMS03]Kamal  Jain,  Mohammad  Mahdian,  and  Mohammad  R  Salavatipour.    Packing
               Steiner trees.  In SODA, volume 3, pages 266–274, 2003.

 [JSW+24]Stephen  P.  Jordan,  Noah  Shutty,  Mary  Wootters,  Adam  Zalcman,  Alexander
               Schmidhuber,  Robbie  King,  Sergei  V.  Isakov,  and  Ryan  Babbush.   Optimization
               by decoded quantum interferometry, 2024.
    [Kar72]Richard  M.  Karp.   Reducibility  among  combinatorial  problems.   In  Raymond  E.
               Miller, James W. Thatcher, and Jean D. Bohlinger, editors,  Complexity  of  Com-
               puter Computations:  Proceedings of a symposium on the Complexity of Computer
               Computations, pages 85–103. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1972.

 [KBPV22]Thorsten Koch, Timo Berthold, Jaap Pedersen, and Charlie Vanaret.  Progress in
               mathematical programming solvers from 2001 to 2020.  EURO Journal on Compu-
               tational Optimization, 10:100031, 2022.
 [KEA+23]Youngseok Kim, Andrew Eddins, Sajant Anand, Ken Xuan Wei, Ewout van den
               Berg,  Sami  Rosenblatt,  Hasan  Nayfeh,  Yantao  Wu,  Michael  Zaletel,  Kristan
               Temme,  and  Abhinav  Kandala.   Evidence  for  the  utility  of  quantum  computing
               before fault tolerance.  Nature, 618(7965):500–505, Jun 2023.
 [KFH+15]Michihiro Koibuchi, Ikki Fujiwara, Shoichi Hirasawa, Ryota Yasudo, Satoshi Fujita,
               Koji Nakano, Takeaki Uno, Takeru Inoue, and Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi. Graph golf:
               the order/degree problem competition, 2015.  Accessed on September 16, 2024.

    [Kho02]Subhash Khot.  On the power of unique 2-prover 1-round games.  In               34th  Annual
               ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing STOC’02, pages 767–775, 2002.
    [KK25]Nils-Christian   Kempke   and   Thorsten   Koch.      A   gpu   accelerated   variant   of
               schroeppel-shamir’s algorithm for solving the market split problem.  Technical Re-
               port 25-10, ZIB, Takustr. 7, 14195 Berlin, 2025.

[KKMO07]Subhash  Khot,  Guy  Kindler,  Elchanan  Mossel,  and  Ryan  O’Donnell.   Optimal
               Inapproximability  Results  for  MAX-CUT  and  Other  2-Variable  CSPs?     SIAM
               Journal on Computing, 37(1):319–357, 2007.
  [KKN22]M. Kuramata, R. Katsuki, and K. Nakata. Solving large break minimization prob-
               lems in a mirrored double round-robin tournament using quantum annealing. PLOS
               ONE, e0266846:1–18, 2022.

   [KLS17]Janardhan Kulkarni, Euiwoong Lee, and Mohit Singh. Minimum Birkhoff-von Neu-
               mann Decomposition. In Friedrich Eisenbrand and Jochen Koenemann, editors, In-
               teger  Programming  and  Combinatorial  Optimization, pages 343–354, Cham, 2017.
               Springer International Publishing.

  [KMV00]T.  Koch,  A.  Martin,  and  S.  Voß.   SteinLib:  An  updated  library  on  steiner  tree
               problems  in  graphs.   Technical  Report  ZIB-Report  00-37,  Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum
               f¨ur Informationstechnik Berlin, Takustr. 7, Berlin, 2000.
    [K ¨O09]P. Kaski and P. RJ         ¨Osterg˚ard. There are 1,132,835,421,602,062,347 nonisomorphic
               one-factorizations of K14.  J. Comb. Des., 17:147–159, 2009.

    [Koc04]Thorsten Koch.         Rapid  Mathematical  Programming.  PhD thesis, Technische Uni-
               versit¨at Berlin, 2004.  ZIB-Report 04-58.


                                                      59
   [KPS19]Iordanis  Kerenidis,  Anupam  Prakash,  and  D´aniel  Szil´agyi.   Quantum  algorithms
              for portfolio optimization.  In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference on Advances
              in Financial Technologies, pages 147–155, 2019.

    [KR19]Petter N Kolm and Gordon Ritter. Modern perspectives on reinforcement learning
              in finance.  SSRN Electron. J., 2019.

[KSMP17]Michael Kolodrubetz, Dries Sels, Pankaj Mehta, and Anatoli Polkovnikov. Geome-
              try and non-adiabatic response in quantum and classical systems.  Physics Reports,
              697:1–87, 2017.

  [KTF14]Petter N. Kolm, Reha T¨ut¨unc¨u, and Frank J. Fabozzi.  60 Years of portfolio opti-
              mization: Practical challenges and current trends. European Journal of Operational
              Research, 234(2):356–371, 2014. 60 years following Harry Markowitz’s contribution
              to portfolio theory and operations research.

[KvHW19]Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling.  Attention, learn to solve routing
              problems!, 2019.
     [LAB]LABS   BF-DCQO   Benchmark.                  https://github.com/AlejoKQ/data_LABS_
              BF-DCQO_Benchmark/tree/main.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].

 [LAZ+25]Deep  Lall,  Abhishek  Agarwal,  Weixi  Zhang,  Lachlan  Lindoy,  Tobias  Lindstr¨om,
              Stephanie Webster, Simon Hall, Nicholas Chancellor, Petros Wallden, Raul Garcia-
              Patron, Elham Kashefi, Viv Kendon, Jonathan Pritchard, Alessandro Rossi, Ani-
              mesh Datta, Theodoros Kapourniotis, Konstantinos Georgopoulos, and Ivan Rung-
              ger.  A review and collection of metrics and benchmarks for quantum computers:
              definitions, methodologies and software, 2025.

[LCBP99]Laurent Laloux, Pierre Cizeau, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, and Marc Potters.  Noise
              Dressing of Financial Correlation Matrices.   Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  83:1467–1470,  Aug
              1999.

[LCM+24]Thomas  Lubinski,  Carleton  Coffrin,  Catherine  McGeoch,  Pratik  Sathe,  Joshua
              Apanavicius,  David Bernal Neira,  Quantum Economic Development Consortium,
              et al.  Optimization applications as quantum performance benchmarks, 2024.

   [LdP16]Marcos  L´opez  de  Prado.   Building  diversified  portfolios  that  outperform  out  of
              sample.  J. Portf. Manag., 42(4):59–69, May 2016.

[LDTA23]Ioannis D Leonidas, Alexander Dukakis, Benjamin Tan, and Dimitris G Angelakis.
              Qubit efficient quantum algorithms for the vehicle routing problem on nisq proces-
              sors.  arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2306, 2023.
    [Leh60]Derrick H Lehmer.  Teaching combinatorial tricks to a computer.               Combinatorial
              Analysis, pages 179–193, 1960.

    [Lev71]Anatoly Y. Levin.  Algorithm for shortest connection of a group of graph vertices.
              Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 12:1477–1481, 1971.

    [Lju21]Ivana Ljubi´c. Solving Steiner trees:  Recent advances, challenges, and perspectives.
              Networks, 77(2):177–204, 2021.

    [LK81]J.  K.  Lenstra  and  A.  H.  G.  Rinnooy  Kan.   Complexity  of  vehicle  routing  and
              scheduling problems.  Networks, 11(2):221–227, 1981.

     [LKH]Lkh3.  [Online; accessed July-18-2025].

 [LLL+24]Fu Luo, Xi Lin, Fei Liu, Qingfu Zhang, and Zhenkun Wang.  Neural combinatorial
              optimization with heavy decoder:  Toward large scale generalization, 2024.

[LME+25]Jeanette  Miriam  Lorenz,  Thomas  Monz,  Jens  Eisert,  Daniel  Reitzner,  F´elicien
              Schopfer, Fr´ed´eric Barbaresco, Krzysztof Kurowski, Ward van der Schoot, Thomas
              Strohm, Jean Senellart, C´ecile M. Perrault, Martin Knufinke, Ziyad Amodjee, and
              Mattia  Giardini.   Systematic  benchmarking  of  quantum  computers:   status  and
              recommendations, 2025.


                                                      60
 [LML+15]He Liu, Matthew K Mukerjee, Conglong Li, Nicolas Feltman, George Papen, Ste-
               fan  Savage,  Srinivasan  Seshan,  Geoffrey  M  Voelker,  David  G  Andersen,  Michael
               Kaminsky, et al. Scheduling techniques for hybrid circuit/packet networks. In Pro-
               ceedings  of  the  11th  ACM  Conference  on  Emerging  Networking  Experiments  and
               Technologies, pages 1–13, 2015.

      [LOQ]Ivan Lima, Daniel Oliveira, and Eduardo Queiroga.  Cvrplib.

     [LR24]Debbie  Lim  and  Patrick  Rebentrost.   A  quantum  online  portfolio  optimization
               algorithm.  Quantum Information Processing, 23(3):63, 2024.

    [Luc14]Andrew Lucas.  Ising formulations of many NP problems.              Front. Phys., 2:5, 2014.

   [LUM22]Xiaoyue Li, A. Sinem Uysal, and John M. Mulvey. Multi-period portfolio optimiza-
               tion using model predictive control with mean-variance and risk parity frameworks.
               European Journal of Operational Research, 299(3):1158–1176, 2022.

  [MAA21]Simon Martiel, Thomas Ayral, and Cyril Allouche.  Benchmarking Quantum Co-
               processors in an Application-Centric, Hardware-Agnostic, and Scalable Way. IEEE
               Transactions on Quantum Engineering, 2:1–11, 2021.

    [Mar52]Harry Markowitz.  Portfolio Selection.               The Journal of Finance, 7(1):77–91, 1952.

 [MAT+24]Nicola Mariella, Albert Akhriev, Francesco Tacchino, Christa Zoufal, Juan Carlos
               Gonzalez-Espitia, Benedek Harsanyi, Eugene Koskin, Ivano Tavernelli, Stefan Wo-
               erner, Marianna Rapsomaniki, Sergiy Zhuk, and Jannis Born. Quantum theory and
               application of contextual optimal transport, 2024.

    [MB98]Stephan Mertens and Christine Bessenrodt. On the ground states of the bernasconi
               model.  Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 31(16):3731, 1998.

   [MBF23]Nishikanta  Mohanty,  Bikash  K  Behera,  and  Christopher  Ferrie.   Analysis  of  the
               vehicle routing problem solved via hybrid quantum algorithms in the presence of
               noisy channels.  IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering, 2023.

[MBHI+95]M. V. Marathe, H. Breu, H. B. Hunt III, S. S. Ravi, and D. J. Rosenkrantz. Simple
               heuristics for unit disk graphs.  Networks, 25(2):59–68, 1995.

 [MCG24a]Ryan   Mandelbaum,   Antonio   D.   Corcoles,   and   Jay   Gambetta.      IBM’s   Big
               Bet  on  the  Quantum-Centric  Supercomputer.     https://spectrum.ieee.org/
               ibm-quantum-computer-2668978269, 2024. [Online; accessed 11-November-2024].

 [McG24b]Catherine McGeoch.  How not to fool the masses when giving performance results
               for quantum computers, 2024.
  [MDM24]Dihin Muriyatmoko, Arif Djunaidy, and Ahmad Muklason.  Heuristics and meta-
               heuristics for solving capacitated vehicle routing problem:  An algorithm compari-
               son.  Procedia Computer Science, 234:494–501, 2024.  Seventh Information Systems
               International Conference (ISICO 2023).

   [MDS17]Pedro Munari,  Twan Dollevoet,  and Remy Spliet.  A generalized formulation for
               vehicle routing problems, 2017.

    [Mer69]Robert C. Merton. Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty:  The continuous-
               time case.  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 51(3):247–257, 1969.

 [MGJ+12]Easwar Magesan, Jay M. Gambetta, B. R. Johnson, Colm A. Ryan, Jerry M. Chow,
               Seth T. Merkel, Marcus P. da Silva, George A. Keefe, Mary B. Rothwell, Thomas A.
               Ohki, Mark B. Ketchen, and M. Steffen.  Efficient measurement of quantum gate
               error by interleaved randomized benchmarking.  Phys. Rev. Lett., 109:080505, Aug
               2012.

 [MHP+23]David  C.  McKay,  Ian  Hincks,  Emily  J.  Pritchett,  Malcolm  Carroll,  Luke  C.  G.
               Govia,  and  Seth  T.  Merkel.   Benchmarking  quantum  processor  performance  at
               scale, 2023.




                                                      61
       [min24]MINLPLib:  A library of mixed-integer and continuous nonlinear programming in-
                  stances.  https://www.minlplib.org/index.html, 2024.  [Online; accessed April-
                  3-2025].

        [Mit23]Hans Mittelmann. Decision Tree for Optimization Software.              https://plato.asu.
                  edu/bench.html, 2023.  [Online; accessed April-3-2025].

    [MKS+22]Samuel   Mugel,   Carlos   Kuchkovsky,   Escolastico   Sanchez,   Samuel   Fernandez-
                  Lorenzo,  Jorge  Luis-Hita,  Enrique  Lizaso,  and  Roman  Orus.   Dynamic  portfolio
                  optimization  with  real  datasets  using  quantum  processors  and  quantum-inspired
                  tensor networks.  Physical Review Research, 4(1):013006, 2022.

       [MM08]Richard  O.  Michaud  and  Robert  O.  Michaud.                 Efficient  Asset  Management:   A
                  Practical  Guide  to  Stock  Portfolio  Optimization  and  Asset  Allocation.   Number
                  9780195331912 in OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press, 2008.

       [MM15]Richard  O.  Michaud  and  Tongshu  Ma.   Efficient  Asset  Management:  A  Practi-
                  cal  Guide  to  Stock  Portfolio  Optimization  and  Asset  Allocation.   The  Review  of
                  Financial Studies, 14(3):901–904, 06 2015.
    [MMW86]Thomas  L  Magnanti,  Paul  Mireault,  and  Richard  T  Wong.                     Tailoring  Benders
                  decomposition for uncapacitated network design.  Springer, 1986.

        [MR59]Marvin Marcus and Rimhak Ree.  Diagonals  of doubly  stochastic matrices.               The
                  Quarterly Journal of Mathematics, 10(1):296–302, 1959.

        [MS12]Mirka  Miller  and  Jozef  Sir´an.   Moore  graphs  and  beyond:   A  survey  of  the  de-
                  gree/diameter problem.  The electronic journal of combinatorics, pages DS14–May,
                  2012.

      [MTZ60]C. E. Miller, A. W. Tucker, and R. A. Zemlin.  Integer programming formulation
                  of traveling salesman problems.  J. ACM, 7(4):326–329, 10 1960.

       [MW84]Thomas  L  Magnanti  and  Richard  T  Wong.   Network  design  and  transportation
                  planning:  Models and algorithms.  Transportation science, 18(1):1–55, 1984.

  [MWHK11]Matthias M¨uller, Brian Whitney, Robert Henschel, and Kalyan Kumaran.                      SPEC
                  Benchmarks, pages 1886–1893.  Springer US, Boston, MA, 2011.

     [NSB+24]Paul D. Nation, Abdullah Ash Saki, Sebastian Brandhofer, Luciano Bello, Shelly
                  Garion, Matthew Treinish, and Ali Javadi-Abhari. Benchmarking the performance
                  of quantum computing software, 2024.

        [NT98]G. L. Nemhauser and M. A. Trick. Scheduling a major college basketball conference.
                  Oper. Res., 46:1–8, 1998.

     [NTI+23]Koji Nakano,  Daisuke Takafuji,  Yasuaki Ito,  Takashi Yazane,  Junko Yano,  Shiro
                  Ozaki, Ryota Katsuki, and Rie Mori. Diverse adaptive bulk search: a framework for
                  solving qubo problems on multiple gpus.  In 2023 IEEE International Parallel and
                  Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW), pages 314–325, 2023.

[OFCCBM23]Corey  O’Meara,   Marina  Fern´andez-Campoamor,   Giorgio  Cortiana,   and  Juan
                  Bernab´e-Moreno.      Quantum   software   architecture   blueprints   for   the   cloud:
                  Overview  and  application  to  peer-2-peer  energy  trading.   In  2023  IEEE  Confer-
                  ence on Technologies for Sustainability (SusTech), pages 191–198. IEEE, 2023.

      [PBE24]Elijah  Pelofske,  Andreas  B¨artschi,  and  Stephan  Eidenbenz.   Short-depth  QAOA
                  circuits and quantum annealing on higher-order Ising models.  npj  Quantum  Inf.,
                  10(1):30, 2024.

        [PM16]Tom  Packebusch  and  Stephan  Mertens.   Low  autocorrelation  binary  sequences.
                  Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 49(16):165001, 2016.

        [Pol03]Tobias Polzin.          Algorithms  for  the  Steiner  problem  in  networks.  PhD thesis, Uni-
                  versit¨at des Saarlandes, 2003.




                                                          62
[PPSHW15]Jan  Palczewski,  Rolf  Poulsen,  Klaus  Reiner  Schenk-Hopp´e,  and  Huamao  Wang.
                Dynamic portfolio optimization with transaction costs and state-dependent drift.
                European Journal of Operational Research, 243(3):921–931, 2015.

     [Pra19]Marcos  Prado.   A  Robust  Estimator  of  the  Efficient  Frontier.               SSRN  Electronic
                Journal, 01 2019.

  [PSUV20]Artur  Pessoa,  Ruslan  Sadykov,  Eduardo  Uchoa,  and  Fran¸cois  Vanderbeck.    A
                generic exact solver for vehicle routing and related problems.  Math. Programming,
                183:483–523, 2020.

[PYBBK24]Timothy Proctor, Kevin Young, Andrew D. Baczewski, and Robin Blume-Kohout.
                Benchmarking quantum computers, 2024.

      [QAO]Independent  set  benchmarking.         https://github.com/eggerdj/independent_
                set_benchmarking.  [Online; accessed 26-March-2025].

         [Qis]Qiskit     Ecosystem:          Qiskit     Optimization.                       https://github.com/
                qiskit-community/qiskit-optimization.  [Online; accessed 31-March-2025].
  [QOBLIB]Quantum   Optimization   Benchmarking   Library.                       https://git.zib.de/qopt/
                qoblib-quantum-optimization-benchmarking-library/.   [Online;  accessed  1-
                April-2025].

    [QUB25]QUBO++ with ABS2 GPU QUBO Solver.                 https://abs2.cs.hiroshima-u.ac.
                jp/home, 2025.  [Online, accessed 31-March-2025].

      [RA00]Neil Chriss Robert Almgren.  Optimal execution of portfolio transactions.              Journal
                of Risk, 3(2):5–39, 2000.

      [RA15]Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive
                graph analytics and visualization.  In AAAI, 2015.

  [RHG+16]Gili  Rosenberg,  Poya  Haghnegahdar,  Phil  Goddard,  Peter  Carr,  Kesheng  Wu,
                and Marcos L´opez de Prado.  Solving the optimal trading trajectory problem us-
                ing  a  quantum  annealer.   IEEE  Journal  of  Selected  Topics  in  Signal  Processing,
                10(6):1053–1060, 2016.

      [Riv24]Fabian Rivetta.  Solving maximum independent set problems and analysis of the
                influence of various constraint classes.  B.sc. thesis, Technische Universit¨at Berlin,
                2024.  B.Sc. Thesis - Technische Universit¨at Berlin supervised by Thorsten Koch.

      [RK23]Daniel Rehfeldt and Thorsten Koch.  Implications,  Conflicts,  and Reductions for
                Steiner Trees.  Mathematical Programming, 197:903 – 966, 2023.
[RPDGS22]R. M. Rosati, M. Petris, L. Di Gaspero, and A. Schaerf. Multi-neighborhood simu-
                lated annealing for the sports timetabling competition ITC2021.  J. Sched., 25:301–
                319, 2022.

      [RT95]Yves Rochat and         ´Eric D. Taillard.  Probabilistic diversification and intensification
                in local search for vehicle routing.  Journal of Heuristics, 1(1):147–167, Sep 1995.

  [RVC+24]Sebasti´an  V  Romero,  Anne-Maria  Visuri,  Alejandro  Gomez  Cadavid,  Enrique
                Solano, and Narendra N Hegade.  Bias-field digitized counterdiabatic quantum al-
                gorithm  for  higher-order  binary  optimization.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2409.04477,
                2024.

       [SAT]The  International  SAT  Competition  Web  Page.         https://satcompetition.
                github.io.

      [Sch70]Manfred Schroeder. Synthesis of low-peak-factor signals and binary sequences with
                low autocorrelation (corresp.). IEEE transactions on Information Theory, 16(1):85–
                89, 1970.

      [Sch03]Alexander Schrijver.         Combinatorial Optimization.  Springer, 2003.




                                                        63
  [SFE+23]Reza   Saberi,    Hamid   Falaghi,    Mostafa   Esmaeeli,    Maryam   Ramezani,    Ali
               Ashoornezhad,   and  Reza  Izadpanah.     Power  distribution  network  expansion
               planning  to  improve  resilience.    IET  Generation,  Transmission  &  Distribution,
               17(21):4701–4716, 2023.

    [SFT16]Abu Bakar Siddique, Saadia Farid, and Muhammad Tahir.  Proof of bijection for
               combinatorial number system.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.05794, 2016.

 [SHPG12]Ankit Singla, Chi-Yao Hong, Lucian Popa, and P Brighten Godfrey. Jellyfish:  Net-
               working data centers randomly. In 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
               Design and Implementation (NSDI 12), pages 225–238, 2012.

  [SJHE24]Gopal Chandra Santra, Fred Jendrzejewski, Philipp Hauke, and Daniel J. Egger.
               Squeezing and quantum approximate optimization.  Phys. Rev. A, 109:012413, Jan
               2024.

  [SLC+24]Ruslan Shaydulin, Changhao Li, Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Matthew DeCross, Dylan
               Herman,  Niraj  Kumar,  Jeffrey  Larson,  Danylo  Lykov,  Pierre  Minssen,  Yue  Sun,
               Yuri Alexeev, Joan M. Dreiling, John P. Gaebler, Thomas M. Gatterman, Justin A.
               Gerber, Kevin Gilmore, Dan Gresh, Nathan Hewitt, Chandler V. Horst, Shaohan
               Hu, Jacob Johansen, Mitchell Matheny, Tanner Mengle, Michael Mills, Steven A.
               Moses, Brian Neyenhuis, Peter Siegfried, Romina Yalovetzky, and Marco Pistoia.
               Evidence of scaling advantage for the quantum approximate optimization algorithm
               on a classically intractable problem.  Science Advances, 10(22):eadm6761, 2024.

     [Slo25]N. J. A. Sloane. Challenge problems:  Independent sets in graphs. Online database
               entry, 2025.  Accessed:  2025-02-25.

     [SM21]Konstantin Sidorov and Alexander Morozov.  A review of approaches to modeling
               applied vehicle routing problems, 2021.

 [SMMn23]K. Smith-Miles and M. A. Mu˜noz.  Instance space analysis for algorithm testing:
               Methodology and software tools.  ACM Comput. Surv., 55, 2023.

[SMMW21]Nicholas Slate, Edric Matwiejew, Samuel Marsh, and Jingbo B Wang.  Quantum
               walk-based portfolio optimisation.  Quantum, 5:513, 2021.

      [SS81]Richard Schroeppel and Adi Shamir.  A     t = O(2n/2), s = O(2n/4) algorithm for
               certain NP-complete problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 10(3):456–464, 1981.

   [SWS11]Ji-Yong Shin,  Bernard Wong,  and Emin G¨un Sirer.  Small-world datacenters.  In
               Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, pages 1–13, 2011.

    [Tep00]Lucie Tepla.  Optimal portfolio policies with borrowing and shortsale constraints.
               Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24(11-12):1623–1639, 2000.

 [TGO+22]T. Tomesh, P. Gokhale, V. Omole, G. Ravi, K. N. Smith, J. Viszlai, X. Wu, N. Har-
               davellas,  M.  R.  Martonosi,  and  F.  T.  Chong.   SupermarQ:  A  Scalable  Quantum
               Benchmark Suite.  In  2022  IEEE  International  Symposium  on  High-Performance
               Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 587–603, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, apr 2022.
               IEEE Computer Society.

     [TK04]R.H.  T¨ut¨unc¨u  and  M.  Koenig.   Robust  asset  allocation.                Annals  of  Operations
               Research, 132(1-4):157 – 187, 2004.

   [TV02a]Paolo Toth and Daniele Vigo.  Models,  relaxations and exact approaches for the
               capacitated  vehicle  routing  problem.   Discrete  Applied  Mathematics,  123(1):487–
               512, 2002.

   [TV02b]Paolo Toth and Daniele Vigo.                The Vehicle Routing Problem. Society for Industrial
               and Applied Mathematics, 2002.

 [TZX+21]Haisheng Tan,  Chi Zhang,  Chao Xu,  Yupeng Li,  Zhenhua Han,  and Xiang-Yang
               Li.  Regularization-based coflow scheduling in optical circuit switches.  IEEE/ACM
               Transactions on Networking, 29(3):1280–1293, 2021.



                                                      64
 [UPP+17]Eduardo  Uchoa,  Diego  Pecin,  Artur  Pessoa,  Marcus  Poggi,  Thibaut  Vidal,  and
              Anand Subramanian. New benchmark instances for the capacitated vehicle routing
              problem.  European Journal of Operational Research, 257(3):845–858, 2017.

   [UYS18]H.  L.  Urdaneta,  J.  Yuan,  and  A.  S.  Siqueira.    Alternative  integer  linear  and
              quadratic programming formulations for ha-assignment problems. Proceeding Series
              of the Brazilian Society of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 6, 2018.
 [VBG23a]D.  Van  Bulck  and  D.  Goossens.    A  traditional  Benders’  approach  to  sports
              timetabling.  Eur. J. Oper. Res., 307:813–826, 2023.

 [VBG23b]D.  Van  Bulck  and  D.  Goossens.   The  international  timetabling  competition  on
              sports timetabling (ITC2021).  Eur. J. Oper. Res., 308:1249–1267, 2023.
    [VG23]David  Van  Bulck  and  Dries  Goossens.   The  international  timetabling  competi-
              tion on sports timetabling (itc2021).   European  Journal  of  Operational  Research,
              308(3):1249–1267, 2023.
[VGC+24]D. Van Bulck, D. Goossens, J.P. Clarner, A. Dimitsas, G. H.G. Fonseca, C. Lamas-
              Fernandez,  M. M. Lester,  J. Pedersen,  A. E. Phillips,  and R. M. Rosati.  Which
              algorithm  to  select  in  sports  timetabling?    European  Journal  of  Operational  Re-
              search, 318:575–591, 2024.

[VGMG23]Eleonora  Vercesi,  Stefano  Gualandi,  Monaldo  Mastrolilli,  and  Luca  Maria  Gam-
              bardella.  On the generation of metric tsp instances with a large integrality gap by
              branch-and-cut.  Mathematical Programming Computation, 15:389–416, 2023.
[VGO+20]Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy,
              David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan
              Bright, St´efan J. van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman,
              Nikolay  Mayorov,  Andrew  R.  J.  Nelson,  Eric  Jones,  Robert  Kern,  Eric  Larson,
              C J Carey, ˙Ilhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde,
              Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris,
              Anne  M.  Archibald,  Antˆonio  H.  Ribeiro,  Fabian  Pedregosa,  Paul  van  Mulbregt,
              and  SciPy  1.0  Contributors.   SciPy  1.0:   Fundamental  Algorithms  for  Scientific
              Computing in Python.  Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020.
  [vHLS23]J. van Doornmalen, C. Hojny, R. Lambers, and F. C. R. Spieksma.  Integer pro-
              gramming  models  for  round  robin  tournaments.   Eur.  J.  Oper.  Res.,  310:24–33,
              2023.

    [Vid22]Thibaut Vidal.  Hybrid genetic search for the CVRP: Open-source implementation
              and SWAP* neighborhood.  Computers & Operations Research, 140:105643, 2022.
   [VIT21]V´ıctor  Valls,  George  Iosifidis,  and  Leandros  Tassiulas.   Birkhoff’s  decomposition
              revisited:  Sparse scheduling for high-speed circuit switches.  IEEE/ACM Transac-
              tions on Networking, 29(6):2399–2412, 2021.

  [VLM20]Thibaut Vidal, Gilbert Laporte, and Piotr Matl.  A concise guide to existing and
              emerging vehicle routing problem variants.   European  Journal  of  Operational  Re-
              search, 286(2):401–416, 2020.
    [Vog12]Heiko Vogel.  Solving market split problems with heuristical lattice reduction.           An-
              nals of Operations Research, 196:581–590, 2012.

[VQG+24]Deborah  Volpe,  Nils  Quetschlich,  Mariagrazia  Graziano,  Giovanna  Turvani,  and
              Robert Wille.  Towards an automatic framework for solving optimization problems
              with  quantum  computers.   In  2024  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Quantum
              Software (QSW), page 46–57. IEEE, jul 2024.

    [VRPa]  https://vrpsolver.math.u-bordeaux.fr.  [Online; accessed 11-March-2025].
    [VRPb]  https://github.com/inria-UFF/VRPSolverEasy.    [Online;  accessed  11-March-
              2025].

   [Wan21]Robert Waniek.  Graph Golf:  Betrachtung des Order-Degree-Problems.  Master’s
              thesis, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 2021.


                                                      65
     [Was02]Alfred  Wassermann.   Attacking  the  market  split  problem  with  lattice  point  enu-
               meration.  Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 6:5–16, 2002.

     [Was25]Alfred Wassermann, 2025.  private communication, paper in preparation.

 [WLG+22]Jonathan Wurtz, Pedro LS Lopes, Christoph Gorgulla, Nathan Gemelke, Alexander
               Keesling,  and  Shengtao  Wang.   Industry  applications  of  neutral-atom  quantum
               computing  solving  independent  set  problems.   arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2205.08500,
               2022.

[WPJA+21]A.  Wack,  H.  Paik,  A.  Javadi-Abhari,  P.  Jurcevic,  I.  Faro,  J.  M.  Gambetta,  and
               B.  R.  Johnson.   Quality,  speed,  and  scale:   three  key  attributes  to  measure  the
               performance of near-term quantum computers, 2021.

 [WRV+24]Dian Wu, Riccardo Rossi, Filippo Vicentini, Nikita Astrakhantsev, Federico Becca,
               Xiaodong Cao, Juan Carrasquilla, Francesco Ferrari, Antoine Georges, Mohamed
               Hibat-Allah, Masatoshi Imada, Andreas M. L¨auchli, Guglielmo Mazzola, Antonio
               Mezzacapo,  Andrew  Millis,  Javier  Robledo  Moreno,  Titus  Neupert,  Yusuke  No-
               mura, Jannes Nys, Olivier Parcollet, Rico Pohle, Imelda Romero, Michael Schmid,
               J. Maxwell Silvester, Sandro Sorella, Luca F. Tocchio, Lei Wang, Steven R. White,
               Alexander Wietek, Qi Yang, Yiqi Yang, Shiwei Zhang, and Giuseppe Carleo. Varia-
               tional benchmarks for quantum many-body problems.  Science, 386(6719):296–301,
               October 2024.

  [WSW24]Jonathan Wurtz, Stefan Sack, and Sheng-Tao Wang.  Solving non-native combina-
               torial optimization problems using hybrid quantum-classical algorithms, 2024.

 [WVG+22]Johannes  Weidenfeller,  Lucia  C.  Valor,  Julien  Gacon,  Caroline  Tornow,  Luciano
               Bello, Stefan Woerner, and Daniel J. Egger.  Scaling of the quantum approximate
               optimization algorithm on superconducting qubit based hardware. Quantum, 6:870,
               dec 2022.

  [XLC+24]Ningyi  Xie,  Xinwei  Lee,  Dongsheng  Cai,  Yoshiyuki  Saito,  Nobuyoshi  Asai,  and
               Hoong  Chuin  Lau.   A  feasibility-preserved  quantum  approximate  solver  for  the
               capacitated vehicle routing problem.  Quantum Information Processing, 23(8):291,
               2024.

     [XN17]Mingyu Xiao and Hiroshi Nagamochi. Exact algorithms for maximum independent
               set.  Information and Computation, 255:126–146, 2017.

  [XRA+23]Pedro Maciel Xavier, Pedro Ripper, Tiago Andrade, Joaquim Dias Garcia, Nelson
               Maculan, and David E. Bernal Neira.  QUBO.jl:  A julia ecosystem for quadratic
               unconstrained binary optimization, 2023.
  [XRP+24]Pedro Maciel Xavier, Pedro Ripper, Joshua Pulsipher, Joaquim Dias Garcia, Nelson
               Maculan, and David E Bernal Neira.  Disjunctive programming meets QUBO.  In
               Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, volume 53, pages 3433–3438. Elsevier, 2024.

  [YZLH17]Tong   Ye,   Jinghui   Zhang,   Tony   T.   Lee,   and   Weisheng   Hu.      Deflection-
               compensated  birkhoff–von-neumann  switches.   IEEE/ACM  Transactions  on  Net-
               working, 25(2):879–895, 2017.

  [ZSKP25]Zhiwei Zhang, Jiayu Shen, Niraj Kumar, and Marco Pistoia.  New improvements
               in solving large labs instances using massively parallelizable memetic tabu search,
               2025.














                                                       66