    Higher-order topological corner states and edge states in grid-like frames


                        Yimeng Suna,1, Jiacheng Xinga,1, Li-Hua Shaob, Jianxiang Wanga,∗

   aDepartment of Mechanics, School of Mechanics and Engineering Science, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
                 bSchool of Aeronautic Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China




Abstract

Continuum grid-like frames composed of rigidly jointed beams are classic subjects in the field of structural
mechanics, whose topological dynamical properties have only recently been revealed. For two-dimensional
frames, higher-order topological phenomena may occur, with frequency ranges of topological states and bulk
bands becoming overlapped, leading to hybrid mode shapes. Concise theoretical results are necessary to
identify the topological modes in such planar continuum systems with complex spectra. In this work, we
present analytical expressions for the frequencies of higher-order topological corner states, edge states, and
bulk states in kagome frames and square frames, as well as the criteria of existence of these topological states
and patterns of their distribution in the spectrum. We identify the edge and corner states even under their
degeneracy with the bulk bands. We show that the corner states are within the bandgaps of edge states
unless topological transitions occur, and demonstrate the robustness of higher-order topological states under
perturbations. These theoretical results fully demonstrate that the grid-like frames, despite being a large
class of two-dimensional continuum systems, have topological states that can be accurately characterized
through concise analytical expressions. This work contributes to the study of topological mechanics, and the
accurate and concise theoretical results facilitate direct applications of topological grid-like frame structures
in industry and engineering.
Keywords:Topological continuum systems, Grid-like frames, Higher-order topological corner states, Edge
states, Square and kagome frames, Analytical characterization for phase transitions



1. Introduction

    Topological mechanical materials [1], originating from topological insulators in condensed-matter physics
[2], canhosttopologicallyprotectedmechanicalmodesthatexhibitrobustness, andhavereceivedwidespread
attention in engineering fields.  Although topological mechanical materials share many similarities with
topological insulators in physical mechanisms, constructing novel topological mechanical systems requires



   ∗Corresponding author.
    Email address:jxwang@pku.edu.cn(Jianxiang Wang)
   1These authors contributed equally to this work.
appropriate formulations that are based on mechanical principles and consequently admit topological prop-
erties mathematically. In the field of topological mechanics, spring–mass systems are widely adopted to
realize static topological zero modes [3,4], modes of self-stress [3], and dynamical topological modes [5–10],
usually enabling an analytical description of the topological properties [8,11]. On the other hand, continuum
topological mechanical systems [12] have received growing interest due to the wider applicability of contin-
uum materials in real-world scenarios; in this respect, truss structures are tailored to host static topological
modes [13,14], and continuum elastic structures with spatially modulated stiffness or mass are constructed
to achieve topological modes in the dynamical regime [15–20]. Research in this regard has greatly facilitated
the application of topological modes in exploring novel wave phenomena [21,22]. Typically, the analysis
of topological modes in continuum elastic systems is largely based on numerical calculations such as finite-
element simulations or experimental methods [23–25].  However, the infinite-degree-of-freedom nature of
the continuum endows such systems with not only multiple frequency bands but also multiple topological
phase transition points [15,16,26], for which it is challenging to obtain a relation between the topological
phases of different bands and the structural parameters in a simple and exact form. The characterization
of topological properties of continuum systems in an analytical manner and identification of topological
phase transitions across the whole frequency spectrum are desired for fully revealing and applying the ample
topological properties of continuum systems. To this end, the authors have recently revealed the topological
dynamical properties for a class of one-dimensional (1D) continuous beam structures, and set up a theoreti-
cal framework to describe the multiple topological phase transitions therein [27]. We demonstrated that the
theoretical framework can be applied to reveal the topological dynamics of a broad class of continuum grid-
like frame structures such as square frames, kagome frames, and bridge-like frames, and some topological
modes at certain frequencies are demonstrated as examples [27].
    Compared with conventional topological insulators, higher-order topological insulators can accommodate
not only robust edge/surface states, but also lower-dimensional corner states [28–35]. Topological mechan-
ical systems, due to the advantage of macroscopic size and flexibility in frequency excitations [36], have
also become a popular platform for research in higher-order topological phases [17,18,37]. Higher-order
topological materials feature more intricate band topology and phase transitions, and may commonly be
accompanied by degeneracy between different types of modes [38–40]. Integrating higher-order topology
into continuum mechanical systems would pose a notable challenge as to an exact characterization of the
topological modes and phase transitions in an analytical manner. Grid-like frames [41–44] are structures
composedofintersectingelasticbeams; whilesuchstructuresdonotexhibitanapparent“concentratedmass”
characteristic [23,45–47], they provide an effective and practical platform for accommodating higher-order
topological phases, being both easy to manufacture and omnipresent in reality in various forms. In two-
dimensional (2D) grid-like frames, as the frequency ranges of higher-order corner states and edge states may
become overlapped with bulk states, leading to possible hybridization of the mode shapes, it is difficult to
                                                                   2
exactly identify the topological modes through numerical techniques. Therefore, an analytical approach able
to derive the existence and frequency ranges of topological states for grid-like frames is of crucial importance
for us to gain an understanding of the topological phases of higher-order topological continuum systems and
guide practical engineering applications.
    In this paper, we present an analytical method to characterize the higher-order topological properties of
planar continuum grid-like frames. For square and kagome frames, we derive exact analytical expressions for
topological phase transitions in terms of geometric parameters. Although the topological corner states, edge
states, and bulk states in higher-order topological grid-like frames may have overlapping frequency regions,
the proposed analytical method enables determination of exact frequency ranges for the corner, edge, and
bulk states, as well as clear existence conditions of the topological modes.  Furthermore, through both
theoretical arguments and finite-element simulations, we demonstrate that while higher-order topological
cornerstatesmaybedegeneratewithbulkstates, theyremainlocalizedwithinthebandgapofedgestatesand
retain robustness. We extend the theory to topological heterostructures, illustrating that connecting grid-
like frames with different higher-order topological phases results in the emergence of topological corner states
at the interface. The concise theoretical results on the topological dynamics of complex frame structures
facilitate direct applications of these findings to industrial engineering domains such as safety assessment
and robust waveguiding [48,49].


2. Preliminaries

    The authors have recently presented a theoretical framework for the band-structure analysis of a broad
class of continuum elastic frame structures, along with a method of deriving the dynamical matrix [27]. For
present purposes, we are concerned with the in-plane motion of several types of frame structures consisting
of beams with uniform linear densitymand bending stiffnessEI, wherein the following rules apply:

    •The governing equation for harmonic modes isH|θ⟩= 0, whereHis a square matrix, and|θ⟩comprises
       the rotation angles at all joints (i.e., intersection points of beam segments) of the frame structure2.

    •The “dynamical matrix”Hrelies on the frequencyω, with matrix elements being analytical functions
       ofβ=            4pω2m/(EI):

          –For adjacent jointsiandj, the(i,j)off-diagonal entry is−C(βl                 ij)/A(βl   ij), whereA(βl)  =
             1−coshβlcosβl,C(βl)  =  sinhβl−sinβl, andl                       ij denotes the length of the beam segment
             connecting the jointsiandj;



   2The frame structures concerned in this paper (square and kagome frames) share the crucial property that every single joint

cannot translate with the beams undergoing no elongation. This results in only rotational degrees-of-freedom at joints.

                                                                    3
            –The(i,i)diagonal entry is     PjB(βl  ij)/A(βl   ij), whereB(βl) = sinhβlcosβl−coshβlsinβl, and
               the sum is over all beam segments around the jointi;

            –The other entries are zero.

    •The Bloch-wave analysis is applicable to the above equation as usual for periodic structures.

The analytical functions as matrix elements come directly from the solution to the differential equation
for beam vibration [50], and the frequency-dependent dynamical matrixHis assembled using the balance
conditions of the bending moments at the joints. The reader is referred to [27] for further details.


3. Topological square grid-like frames

    In this section, we consider the square grid-like frame with first-order and higher-order topological prop-
erties. As shown in Fig.1(a), the square frame consists of alternately arranged beam segments with lengths
l1 andl       2 along two orthogonal directions. All the exterior ends of the outermost beam segments are clamped.
The structure contains a total ofN×Nunit cells, withNunit cells along each edge, and each cell contains
four rigid joints. The lengths of the intracell beam segments of a unit cell arel      1, and the lengths of the
intercell beam segments arel      2. In the following, the existence of topological corner states and edge states in
the spectrum of the square frame structure is investigated, and the frequencies of topological corner states,
edge states and bulk states are given.
    First, the Bloch-wave analysis is carried out on the unit cell of the square frame, and the dynamical
equation is obtained as
                                                                  HsquareBloch|θ⟩= 0,                                     (1)

where|θ⟩represents a vector consisting of in-plane rotation angles of the four rigid joints in one unit cell,
and the Bloch dynamical matrix is


   HsquareBloch  =
      B(βl     1)                                                                                                                                  
2A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)−C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik    yL −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik    xL                       0
                                            B(βl     1)
   −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik yL       2A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)0      − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik    xL
                                                                                  B(βl     1)                                                         ,
   −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik xL                       0                          2A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)−C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik    yL
                                                                                                                       B(βl     1)
                  0      − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik xL  −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik yL         2A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)

                                                                                                                                                      (2)





                                                                            4
                 Fig. 1.Topological square grid-like frame, with a unit cell outlined by red dashed lines.


wherek     x andk   y are the wavenumbers in the two orthogonal directions,L=l                          1 +l   2, and the definitions of
functionsA,BandCare

                                                A(βl)≡1−coshβlcosβl,                                     (3)

                                               B(βl)≡sinhβlcosβl−coshβlsinβl,                           (4)

                                                C(βl)≡sinhβl−sinβl.                                       (5)

Note that Eq. (1) amounts to saying thatH            squareBloch  must have a zero eigenvalue, for which|θ⟩is the corre-
sponding eigenvector. The dynamical matrix can be written in the form of a Kronecker sum:

                                            HsquareBloch  =H    beamBloch(k x)⊗I+I⊗H                beamBloch(k y),                         (6)

whereH            beamBloch is the Bloch dynamical matrix of the periodic 1Dcontinuous beam structurewith alternating






                                                                        5
spans [27], whose expression is
                                             B(βl     1)                                                              
                                          A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)    −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(−ikL),          (7)
                   HbeamBloch(k) =
                                      −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ikL)          B(βl     1)A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)

wherekis the wavenumber.
    For a finite-sized square frame with boundaries, its dynamical matrix can be written in an analogous
manner:
                                                Hsquare =H    beam⊗I+I⊗H               beam,                             (8)

whereH            beam is the dynamical matrix of a finite continuous beam [27].
    In order to obtain the eigenvalue spectrum according to the dynamical matrix, a few key facts should be
noted first. The Kronecker sumH   xy =H x⊗I+I⊗H      y of matricesH  x andH   y has the following property:
If|θ  x⟩andλ    x are an eigenvector–eigenvalue pair ofH  x,|θ y⟩andλ    y are an eigenvector–eigenvalue pair of
Hy, then

                                    Hxy |θ x⟩⊗|θ y⟩ = (H x⊗I+I⊗H      y) |θ x⟩⊗|θ y⟩

                                                           = (H x|θ x⟩)⊗|θ  y⟩+|θ   x⟩⊗(H  y|θ y⟩)                                         (9)

                                                           =λ x|θ x⟩⊗|θ y⟩+|θ   x⟩⊗λ y|θ y⟩

                                                           = (λ x +λ y) |θ x⟩⊗|θ y⟩,

that is,

    •The eigenvectors of the Kronecker sumH    xy are the Kronecker products|θ     x⟩⊗|θ y⟩of the eigenvectors
       of the original matricesH       x andH   y;

    •The corresponding eigenvalues are simply the sumsλ     x +λ y of the eigenvalues of original matrices.

Therefore, the eigenvalue spectrum of the dynamical matrixH             square of the square grid-like frame can be
obtained by performing pairwise addition of the eigenvalues of the dynamical matricesH                 beam of two identical
1D continuous beam structures. On the other hand, for any givenβ, the form of the dynamical matrix
Hbeam (or its Bloch counterpart, presented in Eq. (7)) for a 1D continuous beam is completely identical
to the Hamiltonian of a Su–Schrieffer–Heeger (SSH) chain [51] (up to subtraction of a scalar matrix), with
−C(βl        1)/A(βl       1)and−C(βl                 2)/A(βl       2)in the role of intracell and intercell hopping strengths between sites,
respectively. This analogy with a well-studied topological model can be used as an intermediate step to
deduce the band structure and topological properties of the continuous beam structure [27], and hence the
square grid-like frame. In the following, we derive the frequency ranges of different modes (i.e., corner, edge,
and bulk states) in the spectrum, and analyze the distribution patterns of their frequencies with an example
structure.
                                                                      6
3.1.  Higher-order topological corner states in square frames

    The frequenciesβ     t of topological corner states in a finite square grid-like frame with fixed-end boundaries
must satisfy [27]                                          B(β  tl1)
                                                        2    A(β  tl1) + B(β  tl2)A(β  tl2)= 0.                               (10)

In each positive interval(β     (n−1)0   ,β(n)0   )(whereβ               (n)0  is defined as then-th positive root ofA(βl                 1)A(βl       2) = 0,
andβ       (0)0    = 0), there exists oneβ    t satisfying Eq. (10), denoted byβ         (n)t   (a detailed proof is given by Sun
et al. [27]); notably, there is an infinite number of suchβ        (n)t   in theory. For a specificβ          (n)t  , if and only if the
off-diagonal elements of matrixH             squareBloch satisfy the topological nontriviality condition [27]
                                                                         <                                              (11)
                                                           C(β     (n)t l1)    C(β     (n)t l2)
                                                           A(β     (n)t l1)    A(β     (n)t l2)

do topological corner states exist at frequencyβ                   (n)t  .
    In the following, we show that the higher-order topological corner states of the structure are immensely
overlapped with the bulk bands in frequency, and identify the corner states with the use of Eq. (10). As an
example, we take the square grid-like frame with parametersl                      1 = 40 mm,l         2 = 50 mm, andN= 8. The
eigenvalue spectrum of the dynamical matrixH             square in Eq. (8) of the square frame is shown by gray curves
in Fig.2. All the intersections of the gray curves and the horizontal lineλ= 0(whereλis the ordinate), that
is, allβat which an eigenvalue of the matrixH                     square(β)is zero, constitute the entire spectrum of the square
frame. The horizontal positions of pink vertical lines (A(β       0l2) = 0) and green vertical lines (A(β         0l1) = 0)
represent the frequencieshB(βl      1)β=β                           (n)i0  , and between every two adjacent vertical lines exists a dark blue dashed
curveλ= 2         A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2), which is the left-hand side of Eq. (10);β         (n)t  is represented by the intersections
of dark blue dashed curves and the lineλ= 0.
    Now we note that it is impractical to identify the higher-order topological corner states by directly
observing the eigenvalue spectrum calculated from Eq. (8) in Fig.2, as one cannot tell whether a gray
curve in the vicinity of the dark blue dashed line represents a bulk state or a corner state; actually, all the
topological corner states must lie within the frequency range of bulk states (demonstrated in Section3.3
below). In Fig.2, the existence of corner states is judged by the signs of the functions

                                                       C(βl     1)A(βl       2)±C(βl          2)A(βl       1)                              (12)

represented by the orange and blue dotted curves; for a specific frequencyβ                   (n)t  , if the signs of the ordinates
of blue and orange dotted curves are opposite, the topological corner states exist at frequencyβ                   (n)t  ; if the
signs of the ordinates of blue and orange dotted curves are the same, the topological corner states do not
exist at frequencyβ                   (n)t  . This method of judgment is exactly equivalent to the criterion (11). As a result, in
the range(0,β               (6)0   )in Fig.2, topological corner states only exist at frequenciesβ                                 (1)t  ,β (3)t  andβ       (5)t  . Although
the corner states at these frequencies are degenerate with the bulk states, due to which usual numerical
                                                                           7
Fig. 2.Eigenvalue spectrum of a topological square grid-like frame, with lengthsl                   1  = 40 mm,l         2  = 50 mm. The
gray curves represent the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrixH              square in Eq. (8) of the finite-sized frame, and all
the intersections of the gray curves and the black horizontal lineλ= 0constitute the frequency spectrum of the
frame. Green (pink) vertical lines represent the roots of the equationA(β                       0l1(2))  =  0. The intersections of dark
blue dashed curves withλ= 0pointed by red arrows indicate the frequencies of topological corner states. (a) Edge
states are identified by yellow line segments, where the values of the functionsC(βl                        1)A(βl       2) +C(βl         2)A(βl       1)(orange
dotted curve) andC(βl             1)A(βl       2)−C(βl           2)A(βl       1)(blue dotted curve) have opposite signs. To ensure that the functions
corresponding to the orange and blue dotted curves are clearly plotted in the window, the ordinates of both have
been scaled appropriately (the scaling factor is proportional toexp[−β(l                     1 +l    2)], which does not affect the sign of
the function). (b) Bulk bands correspond to regions on theλ= 0line bounded by adjacent black dashed curves or
adjacent purple dashed curves.                     8
solving approaches may give hybrid modes as results, we can always extract the corner modes (whose
displacements are localized at the corners) from multiple degenerate eigenmodes at a single frequency (that
is, displacements are localized at the corners), by means of singular value decomposition3.
    The mode shapes of topological corner states at frequencyβ                   (1)t  extracted from the bulk states are shown
in Fig.3, where the bending deformations of the beam segments are localized at the corners of the square
frame. The eigenspectrum in Fig.2and eigenvectors of the matrixH                       square (whose elements are analytical
expressions) are calculated with the software MATLAB, and then we plot the beam deflections in Fig.3
according to the eigenvector|θ⟩of rotation angles at joints. Since the structure hasC                     4 symmetry, the modes
in Fig.3(a) and Fig.3(d) exhibitC                                 4 symmetry andC       4 antisymmetry, respectively, and are localized simul-
taneously at the four corners; meanwhile, linear superpositions of the two degenerate modes in Fig.3(b)–(c)
can also yield two modes that are eigenmodes of theC      4-rotation operator (with eigenvalues±i).

3.2.  Edge states in square frames
    Due to the aforementioned property of the Kronecker sum, we recognize that for a square frame (whose
dynamical matrix is given in Eq. (8)), every eigenvalueλ            square of the dynamical matrixH             square of the square
grid-like frame can be obtained by adding two eigenvaluesλ          beam of the dynamical matricesH                 beam of two
continuous beams with the same structural parameters. Now, as an edge state of the 2D structure must
come from the tensor product of two 1D states—anedgestate along one direction and abulkstate along
another direction, the eigenvalueλ        squareedge  of matrixH             square corresponding to an edge state of the square
frame must equal the sum of the eigenvalueλ        beamedge of matrixH             beam corresponding to an edge state, and the
eigenvalueλ        beambulk of matrixH             beam corresponding to a bulk state. Through the analogy in matrix form with
the Hamiltonian of the SSH chain (whose topological edge states lie at zero energy), we have
                                                                 B(βl     1)
                                                   λbeamedge  =   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)+ 0.                            (13)

On the other hand, it follows from Eq. (7) that
                                           B(βl     1)                     C(βl     1)                               ,               (14)
                              λbeambulk  =  A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)±A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)

wherek     x(y)  L∈(−π,π]. Thus, we obtain
                                                         B(βl     1)                     C(βl     1)                               .      (15)
                λsquareedge    =λ   beamedge  +λ   beambulk  = 2A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)±A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)

In order for the dynamical equationH                 square|θ⟩= 0of the square frame to have an edge-state solution, it
holds thatλ        squareedge    = 0, that is, the frequencyβof the edge state should satisfy [27]
                                    B(βl     1)                         C(βl     1)                              .                 (16)
                                 2    A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=±A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)



   3Essentially, multiple modes with the same (i.e., degenerate) eigenvalue can be arbitrarily linearly superposed to produce

another eigenmode; singular value decomposition only serves to determine the appropriate superposition coefficients.
                                                                          9
Fig. 3.Topological corner modes of square grid-like frame, where the modes are quadruply degenerate at frequency
β(1)t  , and are localized at the corners.


Moreover, the topological nontriviality condition should apply: forβsatisfying Eq. (16), if and only if
                                                               C(βl     1)< C(βl     2),                                 (17)

                                                               A(βl     1)      A(βl     2)

edge states exist at frequenciesβ.
    We prove the existence of solutions for Eq. (16) below. As we will see, there exists a set of continuousC(β     tl1)             ̸= C(β     tl2),
βsatisfying Eq. (16) in every interval(β              (n−1)0   ,β(n)t   )and(β           (n)t ,β(n)0   ). Meanwhile, when      A(β     tl1)     A(β     tl2)
topological corner states must lie within bandgaps of edge states, that is, the frequencies of corner states

                                                                           10
Fig. 4.Edge modes of the square grid-like frame. (a)–(b) Edge states atk   x(y)  L= 0,k   x(y)  L=πin the interval
(β  (0)0 ,β(1)t   )in Fig.2. (c)–(d) Edge states atk       x(y)  L=π,k    x(y)  L= 0in the interval(β           (1)t ,β(1)0   )in Fig.2.


are not inside the frequency range of edge states. To this end, we let

                                                                                        2        B(βl     1)                 2
                              f(β) =       C(βl     1)                                    −4                                    .
                                           A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)

The solution set off(β) = 0is the frequency range where edge states may exist (see Eq. (16)). Now consider
f(β    (n)t   ). First note that Eq. (10) holds at the frequenciesβ            t of the corner states, which implies that the





                                                                              11
                                                                C(β     tl1)̸=C(β     tl2), we have
second term off(β        (n)t   )is zero. Next, when              A(β     tl1)     A(β     tl2)
                                                                               ≥               −              >0.
                                 C(β  tl1)                                             C(β  tl1)          C(β  tl2)
                                 A(β  tl1) + C(β  tl2)A(β  tl2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)      A(β  tl1)         A(β  tl2)

Therefore, forβ=β           (n)t  ,
                                                                      f(β    (n)t   )>0,
                                                                                         C(β     tl1)̸=C(β     tl2), the frequencies of corner
and Eq. (16) never holds. It is concluded that as long as                                  A(β     tl1)     A(β     tl2)
states do not coincide with those of edge states. On the other hand, whenβ→β                 (n)0  (i.e.,A(βl              1)→0  ± or
A(βl     2)→0  ±), in the light of the identityC   2(βl)−B        2(βl) =−2 sinh(βl) sin(βl)·A(βl), it holds that
                                                           B(βl     1(2)) 2
                                         f(β) =−3           A(βl     1(2))    +O[(β−β                (n)0   )−1  ]→−∞;


we note that the order of the first term is(β−β           (n)0   )−2 , and thusf(β)tends to negative infinity on both
sides ofβ    (n)0  . In terms of this result and the conditionf(β                      (n)t   )>0, there must exist a set of continuousβ
satisfying Eq. (16) in each interval(β            (n−1)0   ,β(n)t   )and(β           (n)t ,β(n)0   ). That is to say, the frequencyβ                     (n)t   of the
corner states lies within the bandgaps of candidate edge states4.
     The above conclusions are verified by the example structure, whose eigenvalue spectrum is shown in
Fig.2(a). For any specificβ, when the sign on the right-hand side of Eq. (15) is fixed and taken to be either
plus or minus, the eigenvalueλ        squareedge  is monotonic with respect tok  x(y)  Lin the rangek      x(y)  L∈[0,π], and
the lower and upper bounds ofλ    squareedge  are reached atk  x(y)  L= 0orπ, represented by orange and blue solid
curves as shown in Fig.2(a). There exist a blue and an orange solid curve between each dark blue dashed
curve and the neighboring pink or green vertical line. The frequenciesβthat satisfy Eq. (16) correspond to
the intervals bounded by intersections of adjacent blue and orange curves with axisλ= 0, within the ranges
(β  (n−1)0   ,β(n)t   )and(β           (n)t ,β(n)0   ).
     Now we show that edge states only exist atβwhich satisfy both Eqs. (16) and (17).  We note that
only in part of the intervals defined by Eq. (16) are edge states present, indicated by yellow line segments
in Fig.2(a), where the two functions[C(βl                                  1)A(βl       2)±C(βl          2)A(βl       1)]corresponding to the blue and orange
dotted curves take opposite signs, rendering the condition (17) true. The edge modes of the square grid-like
frame in intervals(0,β         (1)t   )and(β           (1)t ,β(1)0   )are shown in Fig.4, where the deformations of beams are localized
at the edges of square frames. The above conclusions are verified.


3.3.  Bulk states in square frames

     Due to the property of the Kronecker sum, the eigenvalueλ        squarebulk  of matrixH             square corresponding to
any bulk state of the square grid-like frame equals the sum of two eigenvaluesλ          beambulk  of matrixH             beam



   4The solutions to Eq. (16) correspond to the frequencies of candidate edge states.

                                                                             12
Fig. 5.Band structure of the square frame with(l               1,l2) = (40 mm,50 mm)or(50 mm,40 mm). Inset shows the first
Brillouin zone.


corresponding to bulk states of the continuous beam in the two orthogonal directions.  It follows from
Eq. (14) that
                        B(βl     1)                         C(βl     1)                                ±  C(βl     1)                                .   (18)
     λsquarebulk    = 2  A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)±A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    xL)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    yL)

For a specificβ, the set of eigenvaluesλ                      squarebulk  is the union of three clusters, denoted as top, middle and
bottom, given by the expressions
                             B(βl     1)                     C(βl     1)                           +C(βl     1)                         ,      (19)
        λsquarebulk(top) = 2  A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)+A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    xL)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    yL)
                             B(βl     1)                     C(βl     1)                              −C(βl     1)                             ,  (20)
    λsquarebulk(middle) = 2   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)+A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    y(x)  L)
                             B(βl     1)                     C(βl     1)                          −C(βl     1)                          .      (21)
   λsquarebulk(bottom) = 2    A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)−A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    xL)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik    yL)

In order for the dynamical equation (1) of square frames to have nontrivial solutions,λ                      squarebulk    = 0needs to
be satisfied, which corresponds to the bulk states of square grid-like frames. The dispersion diagram of the
bulk bands for a square frame with(l          1,l2) = (40 mm,50 mm)is presented in Fig.5.
     As shown in Fig.2(b), the frequency ranges of bulk states satisfyingλ                            squarebulk(top)  = 0orλ      squarebulk(bottom)  =
0correspond to the set of points on the horizontal axis that lie between two neighboring black dashed
curves, and the frequency ranges of bulk states that satisfyλ            squarebulk(middle) = 0correspond to the set of points
between two neighboring purple dashed curves. It is interesting to note that the set of eigenvaluesλ      squarebulk(top)
corresponding to Eq. (19) has exactly the same range as given by the expression
                                            B(βl     1)                            C(βl     1)                              .                   (22)
                                         2    A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)+ 2A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ikL)

The set of eigenvaluesλ          squarebulk(bottom) corresponding to Eq. (21) has exactly the same range as given by the
expression                                  B(βl     1)                                                                     .                   (23)
                                         2                                 −2      C(βl     1)
                                              A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2) A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ikL)
                                                                                  13
By comparing the expressions (22) and (23) with Eq. (14), it is concluded that part of the bulk bands of the
square frame, that is, the bulk frequency ranges pertaining to the “top” and “bottom” clusters (λ  squarebulk(top) = 0
orλ    squarebulk(bottom)  = 0), is identical to the frequency ranges of bulk bands of the continuous beam structure
[27]. Meanwhile, the frequency ranges of bulk states satisfyingλ                        squarebulk(middle) = 0(the “middle” cluster) must
contain all the frequencies of corner statesβ     t, since the range of values of Eq. (20) for different(k    x,ky)alwayshB(βl      1)i
includes the valueλ        squarebulk(middle) = 2A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2)+0 =λ   squarecorner. This conclusion is also graphically shown
from Fig.2(b), where the dark blue dashed curves are always immersed in the shaded regions between
adjacent purple dashed curves.


3.4.  Remarks on the Kronecker-sum approach

    The above solution procedure in this section intensively makes use of the mathematical property of the
Kronecker sum, which provides an efficient way to decompose the 2D problem into simpler ones of the
1D constituents. Such technique is actually not limited to solving the square frame, but also applies to
frames with rectangular or even parallelogram geometries. We note that for a dynamical matrixH      xy to
admit a Kronecker-sum formH    xy =H x⊗I+I⊗H      y, it is required that all rows of the frame structure be
identical (and so should all columns); the boundaries of the whole frame structure must be parallel to the
1D constituent rows and columns; furthermore, each joint can only be connected to joints within the same
row and the same column, for which reason the application of this approach to the kagome lattice would
not be possible. The solution of the kagome frame employs a distinct approach, detailed in Section4.


3.5.  Robustness of topological corner states in square frames

    We analyze the robustness of higher-order topological corner states from three perspectives in this sub-
section. First we propose an analytical argument on the equivalence of the condition|C(β          tl1)A(β   tl2)|=
|C(β   tl2)A(β   tl1)|, the emergence or disappearance of corner states, and degeneracy of candidate edge-state
bands (i.e., closure of the bandgap of candidate edge states): these three events happen simultaneously.
Second, we perform theoretical calculations: when defects are introduced into a square frame structure, the
frequencies and localization lengths of topological corner states are computed using the dynamical matrix
method. Finally, we conduct finite-element simulations to calculate the frequencies and localization lengths
of topological corner states for the defect-inflicted structure. The results are then compared.
    First, we recall from Section3.1that the frequencies of the corner states are given by Eq. (10), and theC(β     tl1) andC(β     tl2) (Condition (11));
existence of the states are dictated by the relative magnitudes of                       A(β     tl1)     A(β     tl2)
thus, the condition for the emergence and disappearance of such corner states is exactly|C(β         tl1)A(β   tl2)|=
|C(β   tl2)A(β   tl1)|. Continuously varying the geometric parametersl                        1,2  does not affect the existence of corner
states, as long as this condition is not triggered; moreover, the corner states do consistently reside within



                                                                    14
the bandgaps of candidate edge states, whose frequencies are given by Eq. (16).  This is proved in Sec-C(β     tl1)̸=C(β     tl2), there exists one band of candidate edge
tion3.2, where we demonstrate that when                    A(β     tl1)   A(β     tl2)
states on each side of the corner-state frequencyβ        t, with a frequency range isolated fromβ    t. In contrast,
when|C(β       tl1)A(β   tl2)|=|C(β     tl2)A(β   tl1)|, the boundaries of these candidate edge bands touch and become
degenerate atβ  t. Therefore, as long as the (candidate) edge bands remain nondegenerate, the existence of
corner states are unchanged, indicating robustness.
    Analogous conclusions also hold for edge states: the emergence and disappearance of edge states are
associated with the crossing of bulk bands, typically originating at pointXof the Brillouin zone. The band
structure shown in Fig.5contains two such near-degenerate points, occurring atβL= 9.45and18.85. From
the dispersion curves of the square frame structure, it is evident that pointXof the Brillouin zone does
not necessarily correspond to the band-edge frequencies of the bulk bands. Consequently, the frequency
ranges of both corner states and edge states in higher-order topological frames may overlap with those of
bulk states.
    Next, we introduce geometric defects into the frame configuration, and calculate the frequency and
localization characteristics of the higher-order corner states under such perturbations using the dynamical-
matrix formulation. We consider three types of defects that preserveC  4v  symmetry: defects at the corners,
on the edge, and in the bulk, as illustrated in Fig.6(a)–(c). In these configurations, the positions of specific
joints in the frame are shifted, resulting in corresponding changes in the lengths of the adjacent beams.
The displacements of joints in the horizontal and vertical directions are set asδ  x  =δ y  =r·|l       1−l   2|/4,
and varying the defect parameterrchanges the magnitude of the defect. For each perturbed configuration,
the frequencies and localization lengths of the corner states are computed. Specifically, we analyze the two
corner states that are eitherC  4-symmetric orC    4-antisymmetric, which correspond to Fig.3(a) and Fig.3(d)
atr= 0. To enhance theaccuracy forcalculatinglocalization lengths, we construct asquare frame consisting
of8×8unit cells and compute the vibration modes corresponding to the corner states, where we extract
the rotational anglesθ            (m,n)
                             A    ((m,n)being the unit-cell index as shown in Fig.1) on sublattice A within the
bottom-left quadrant of the structure, in order to avoid finite-size effects. A least-squares fit is performed against the norm-1 distance to the corner,
onln θ(m,n)                                                   (m+n−2)L. The slope of the resulting fitted line
        A
is denoted ask  s, and the localization length is subsequently obtained asλ=−1/k      s.
    Following the aforementioned approach, we analyze the three types of defects by varying the perturbation
parameter within the ranger∈(−1,1). The frequencies of the symmetric corner state, calculated using
the dynamical matrix method, are presented in Fig.6(d), while those of the antisymmetric corner state are
showninFig.6(e). Additionally, thecorrespondinglocalizationlengthsforthesymmetricandantisymmetric
corner states are given in Fig.6(f)–(g). From Fig.6(d)–(e), it is seen that defects at the corners have the
most significant effect on the frequencies of the corner states. Nevertheless, within the ranger∈(−0.4,0.4),
the variation of frequencies does not exceed2%. In contrast, the defects on the edge or in the bulk have a
                                                                    15
Fig. 6.Theoretical calculations of topological corner states in square frames with defects. (a)–(c) Square frames
with three types of defects, where the displacements of the joints at the defects are indicated by red arrows. (d)–(e)
Frequency variations of the corner states withC         4-symmetry andC        4-antisymmetry, with respect to the magnitude of
defectδfor different types of defects. Hereris defined so thatδ=r·|l                                       1−l    2|/4. (f)–(g) Localization lengths of the
C4-symmetric andC        4-antisymmetric corner states.


negligible influence on the frequencies of corner states. On the other hand, the localization lengths of the
two corner states are qualitatively unchanged under perturbations withr∈(−0.4,0.4), and remain small

                                                                            16
Fig. 7.Finite-element analysis of topological corner states in a square frame with corner defects. (a) Upper: grid
structure with8×8cells used for simulation; the width of the beams is1/40ofmin{l                                            1,l2}(beams are thickened in the
illustration for visual effects). Fixed boundary conditions are imposed on all outermost ends. Lower: typical mesh
around a joint. (b)–(c) Frequencies of theC       4-symmetric andC        4-antisymmetric corner states from finite-element
calculations as the magnitude of defects at the corners varies, together with a comparison to theoretical results. (d)–
(e) Localization lengths of theC       4-symmetric andC        4-antisymmetric corner states from theoretical and finite-element
results. (f)–(g) Corner states with a defect parameter ofr=−0.25.


positive numbers even for|r|up to1, as illustrated in Fig.6(f)–(g). It is concluded that the topological
corner states are well localized and are robust against a wide range ofr.
    Finally, we demonstrate finite-element simulations for robustness of the corner states of a square frame,
for the purposes of investigating the influence of geometric defects on the frequencies and localization lengths


                                                                          17
of higher-order topological corner states. The simulations are conducted using the Solid Mechanics module
of the software COMSOL Multiphysics. A set of free triangular mesh is constructed, and we ensure that
each beam segment contains at least two layers of elements along the width direction (see the lower part
of Fig.7(a)), thereby accurately capturing the bending deformations. The material is structural steel, with
Young’s modulus of200 GPaand a density of7850 kg/m                3.
    For the configuration containing defects at the corners, the frequencies of theC      4-symmetric andC       4-
antisymmetric topological modes obtained from finite-element simulations are presented in Fig.7(b)–(c) in
relation to the defect parameterr. In these figures, a comparison is made between the finite-element and the
theoretical results based on the dynamical matrix method described in this paper. The discrepancy between
the two approaches is found to be within1%for the mode frequencies, thereby validating the accuracy of
the proposed theoretical framework for obtaining the frequencies of topological states in such structures.
The localization lengths of the symmetric and antisymmetric topological modes with respect to the defect
parameterr, obtained from finite-element simulations, are shown in Fig.7(d)–(e). The topological corner
states remain robust against a wide range ofr. As an example, forr=−0.25, the vibration modes of the
symmetric and antisymmetric corner states in the square grid-like frame are illustrated in Fig.7(f)–(g),
demonstrating that the deflections of beams are predominantly localized at the corners.

3.6.  Square frame heterostructure with corner states at the interface

    Weconsidercombiningtwogrid-likeframestructureswithdistincttopologicalphasestoformaninterface
as in Fig.8(a), which can host topological modes within common bandgaps.
    Since exchanging the geometric parameters(l                       1,l2)↔(l        2,l1)simply amounts to a translation of the bulk
(as long as no boundaries are concerned), the two frame structures obtained as such share identical bulk
bands. As the continuum grid frames possess higher-order topological properties, topological corner states
may emerge at the interface. The existence of topological corner states at the interface is determined by the
difference between the bulk topological invariants of the two structures, in this case the 2D multiband Zak
phases, defined as [52,53]
                                                         ZZ                  nX
                                  (γ  (n)x ,γ(n)y   ) = L2π                     ⟨w j(k)|i∇        k|w j(k)⟩,                   (24)
                                                             BZ dk x dk y  j=1

where|w     j(k)⟩is the normalized in-cell displacement field of thej-th frequency band at wavevectork; the
sum is over the firstnbands; and the integral is over the first Brillouin zone. We calculate the 2D multiband
Zak phases for square frame structures with different combinations of(l     1,l2), following the numerical scheme
in [53]; the results forn= 1,4,7which determine the existence of the corner states at the interface nearβ                               (1)t  ,
β(2)t  ,β (3)t  are shown in Fig.9. It is seen that the first bulk band is topologically nontrivial with a topological
phase of(π,π)forl               1 < l2, and topologically trivial with a topological phase of(0,0)forl                  1 > l2, which
leads to a topologically protected interface corner state above the first frequency band, upon combining two
                                                                    18
Fig. 8.The topological corner states obtained at the interface in different frequency ranges. (a) A heterostructure
obtained by connecting two lattice structures with different length parameters(l                         1,l2). In simulation, the parameters
are(l        1,l2) = (40 mm,50 mm)(upper-right part) and(l                            1,l2) = (50 mm,40 mm)(remaining part). (b)–(c) Topological
corner modes with the frequencies of1868.2 Hzand5867.2 Hzat the interface, where the beam segments are at
their first and second flexural modes. (d)–(e) Mode spectrum around the frequency-isolated corner modes, with a
difference in frequency of more than around30 Hzfrom nearby modes.


structures with interchanged parametersl                     1,2 . However, the topological phase becomes more complicated for
higher-frequency bands, where multiple instances of phase transition occur, and exchangingl               1 andl       2 for the
two bulks does not induce an interface corner state nearβ         (2m)t    (corresponding to band numbern= 6m−2),
as the topological phase(γ             (n)x ,γ(n)y   )is unaltered in these cases. The numerical results are consistent withC(β     tl1) =C(β     tl2).
the analytical result that the topological phase transitions happen at                                A(β     tl1)     A(β     tl2)
    We construct a heterostructure for simulation in the finite-element software COMSOL Multiphysics,
as shown in Fig.8(a), which is formed by connecting a square frame with length parameters(l                                 1,l2)  =
(40 mm,50 mm)in the upper-right part and another square frame with(l                            1,l2) = (50 mm,40 mm)occupying


                                                                           19
Fig. 9.Numerical results of 2D multiband Zak phases(γ        x,γy), with respect to the geometric parameterΛ, where
Λis defined such that the lengths of beams arel          1 = (1 + Λ)l     ave andl        2 = (1−Λ)l             ave (herel          ave = 45 mmis fixed). (a)
(γ  (1)x ,γ(1)y   )for determining the existence of corner states at the interface nearβ           (1)t  . (b)–(c)(γ                (4)x ,γ(4)y   ),(γ     (7)x ,γ(7)y   )for
determining the existence of corner states nearβ         (2)t  andβ        (3)t  , respectively.


the remaining part. The finite-element analysis reveals an isolated topological corner state at1868.2 Hz
as shown in Fig.8(b), where the beam segments predominantly exhibit first-order flexural mode shapes.
Its frequency lies between the first and fourth bulk bands, and is slightly aboveβ  (1)t  .  Going to higher-
frequency regions, no such corner state is found aroundβ              (2)t  , and the next occurrence of a corner state
lies aroundβ              (3)t  , above the seventh band; the beam segments vibrate in second-order flexural mode shapes
(Fig.8(c)). Such behavior is consistent with numerical results of the topological phases in Fig.9, manifesting
the bulk–boundary correspondence for higher-order topological heterostructures. The structure possesses
more corner states in even higher-frequency regions. These corner states are separated from the nearby
modes as shown in Fig.8(d)–(e), and as a consequence, such heterostructures have potential applications
for robust waveguiding [54,55].


4. Topological kagome grid-like frames

    In this section, we consider the kagome frame structure and analyze its (first-order and higher-order)
topological properties. The kagome frame structure consists of beam segments with alternating lengthsl              1
andl       2 along each of the three non-orthogonal directions; as shown in Fig.10(a), the structure contains two
different types of equilateral triangles formed by beam segments, one pointing upwards with side lengthl            1,
and the other pointing downwards with side lengthl            2. The unit cell is taken to include the upward-pointing
triangle, whose three rigid joints lie at sublattices A, B and C, respectively.  Therefore, the lengths of

                                                                        20
intracell beam segments arel      1, and the lengths of intercell beam segmentsl    2. The whole structure contains
N(N+ 1)/2unit cells in total, whereNis the number of unit cells along each side. All the exterior ends
of the outermost beam segments are clamped ends. Each unit cell is labeled by(m,n), so that the position
vector of the cell isr=mLe               1 +nLe         2 (whereL=l                   1 +l   2 is the lattice constant, ande       1,e 2 are unit vectors
along lattice directions, depicted in Fig.10(a)). We investigate the existence of edge states and higher-order
topological corner states of the kagome frame, and determine the eigenfrequencies of the corner states, edge
states, and bulk states in the frequency spectrum.
    We first take a unit cell of the kagome frame and perform a Bloch-wave analysis, through which the
dynamical equation is obtained as
                                                                 HkagomeBloch |θ⟩= 0,                                    (25)

where|θ⟩= (θ                  A,θB,θC)T denotes the rotation angles at the three rigid joints in one unit cell, and the Bloch
dynamical matrix is
                                 2X                                                                                                      
                     2     B(βl  i)                                                                                            

                                 i=1  A(βl  i)     −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik     1L   −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) e−ik     2L

                                                                         2X
      Hkagome          −C(βl     1)                                         B(βl  i)                                                        .    (26)
        Bloch    =        A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik 1L                 2A(βl  i)     −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) ei(k   1−k    2)L
                                                                       i=1
                                                                                                                  2X
                       −C(βl     1)                                                                                   B(βl  i)
                          A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) eik 2L −C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2) ei(k   2−k    1)L                  2i=1A(βl  i)

Herek         1 =k·e       1 =k x, andk       2 =k·e       2 = (1/2)k    x + (√3/2)k    y.k 1Ldenotes the phase difference between the
joint rotational angles of the two neighboring unit cells on the same sublattice along the directione                 1, and
k2Ldenotes the phase difference alonge             2.
    Similarly, for a finite-sized kagome grid-like frame, the dynamical matrix is denoted asH    kagome, whose
                                           2P  B(βl     i)
main-diagonal elements are2                    A(βl     i), and off-diagonal elements are−   C(βl      1)A(βl      1) or−  C(βl      2)A(βl      2) depending on the
                                          i=1
length of the beam segment corresponding to the entry position.

4.1.  Higher-order topological corner states in kagome frames

    Since the kagome lattice has generalized chiral symmetry [56,57] (after the main-diagonal elements of
the matrixH             kagomeBloch  become identically zero by subtracting a scalar matrix), the frequencies of topological
corner states in a finite kagome grid-like frame with fixed-end boundaries must satisfy [27]
                                                           B(β  tl1)
                                                        2    A(β  tl1) + B(β  tl2)A(β  tl2)= 0.                               (27)

Meanwhile, if and only if [27]                                      <             ,                                 (28)
                                                             C(β  tl1)         C(β  tl2)
                                                             A(β  tl1)         A(β  tl2)
topological corner states exist atβ  t.  The eigenfrequency spectrum of an example kagome frame with
l1 = 40 mmandl              2 = 50 mmis depicted in Fig.11. The frequencies of topological corner states are marked
                                                                          21
Fig.  10.(a) Kagome grid-like frame without translational displacements at joints, where a unit cell is marked
by red dashed lines. (b) Schematic illustration of the solution process of the existence condition of corner states,
i.e., Eqs. (27)–(28). (c) Schematic illustration of the solution process of the existence condition of edge states, i.e.,
Eqs. (39)–(41).


with red arrows in Fig.11. As shown in Fig.11(b), the ordinates of the blue and orange dotted curves
have opposite signs at frequenciesβ                     (1)t  ,β (3)t  andβ       (5)t  , ensuring the existence of topological corner states
at these frequencies; this method of judgment is exactly equivalent to the criterion (28). Although certain
frequencies of topological corner states may lie within bulk bands, for exampleβ                (1)t  , the topological corner
states still exist. The corner modes obtained theoretically are shown in Fig.12.

                                                                        22
Fig. 11.Eigenvalue spectrum of a topological kagome grid-like frame, withl                1 = 40 mm,l         2 = 50 mm. Gray curves
represent eigenvalues of the dynamical matrixH              kagome of the finite-sized frame, and all the intersections of gray
curves and the black horizontal lineλ= 0constitute the frequency spectrum of the frame. Pink (green) vertical
lines represent the roots of equationA(β                       0l2(1)) = 0. The intersections of the dark blue dashed curve withλ= 0
marked by red arrows indicate the frequencies of topological corner states. (a) Edge states are indicated by yellow
line segments, where the values of the functions2[B(βl                            1)/A(βl       1) +B(βl         2)/A(βl       2)](dark blue dashed curves) and
−C(βl         1)/A(βl       1) +C(βl         2)/A(βl       2)(pink dotted curves) are of the same sign. Edge states also exist at frequencies
indicated by yellow stars. (b) Bulk bands correspond to regions on theλ= 0line bounded by adjacent black solid
curves and purple dashed curves.

                                                                              23
Fig. 12.Topological corner modes in kagome grid-like frames. The modes are triply degenerate at frequencyβ                           (1)t  ,
and localized at the corners.


    In the following we illustrate the mode characteristics of the above topological corner states in Fig.12,
including localization, using an analytical approach. Consider a semi-infinite kagome lattice with one corner
boundary as shown in Fig.10(b). Inspired by Bloch’s theorem, we let the corner-state solution be of the
form
                                                  θ(m,n)
                                                    A       = ΘAeik·r     = ΘAei(mk   1L+nk       2L)  ;                           (29)

similarly, let
                                     θ(m,n)                                     )
                                      B       = ΘBei(mk   1L+nk       2L) ,  θ(m,nC       = ΘCei(mk   1L+nk       2L) .                   (30)

    Because we wish to solve the corner state which is localized at the corner and exponentially decays along
both directionse                   1 ande       2, we define the decay coefficient ase  ik 1L =r   1 ande       ik 2L =r   2 (herek          1,k 2 are no
longer real numbers and have a nonzero imaginary part), and hence

                                                            θA(B,C)       = ΘA(B,C)   rm1 rn2.                                (31)

We compare the balance equations of the bending moments at joint A in unit cells(1,1)and(2,1)(labeled
by blue stars in Fig.10(b)):
                              B(βl     1)
                     0 = 2      A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)θ(1,1)A − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)θ(1,1)B − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)θ(1,1)C  ,                      (32)
                              B(βl     1)
                     0 = 2      A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)θ(2,1)A − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)θ(2,1)B − C(βl     1)A(βl     1)θ(2,1)C − C(βl     2)A(βl     2)θ(1,1)B  .         (33)


Considering Eq. (31), we obtainθ                   (1,1)B     = 0. ThusΘ      B = 0, and it follows that

                                                                     θ(m,n)
                                                                      B       = 0.                                      (34)

                                                                           24
In a similar way, we compare the balance equations of the bending moments at joint A in unit cells(1,1)
and(1,2)(labeled by blue stars), andθ                        (1,1)C     = 0is obtained. ThusΘ      C = 0, and it follows that

                                                                    θ(m,n)
                                                                      C       = 0.                                      (35)

    Then, for joint C in unit cell(m,n)(marked by one of the yellow stars), the balance equation of the
bending moments is
                                                          t2θ(m,n+1)            )
                                                              A          +t   1θ(m,nA       = 0,                                (36)

wheret           1 isdefinedas−C(βl            1)/A(βl       1), andt         2 isdefinedas−C(βl            2)/A(βl       2)(notethatwehaveusedEqs.(34)
and (35)); hereβ=β         t that satisfies Eq. (27). For joint B in unit cell(m,n), the balance equation of the
bending moments is
                                                          t2θ(m+1,n)            )
                                                              A          +t   1θ(m,nA       = 0.                                (37)

By substituting Eq. (31) into Eqs. (36) and (37), we obtain

                                                                 r2 =r   1 =− t1t2.

Thus,                                                                                    m+n
                                                      θ(m,n)                      −t1            .                             (38)
                                                       A(B,C)       = ΘA(B,C)        t2

When|r             1,2 |<1, i.e.,|t               1|<|t      2|, such a state is localized at the corner, and decays exponentially away from
the corner. In this case, the solution|θ⟩given by Eqs. (34), (35) and (38) satisfies the balance equations
of the bending moments at all joints in the semi-infinite structure, thus indeed a feasible solution for the
corner state.


4.2.  Edge states in kagome frames

    In this subsection, we first present the frequency ranges of edge states in kagome grid-like frames, and
then give the proofs of the theoretical results.
    The frequencies of edge states in kagome frames satisfy
                                       B(βl     1)                         C(βl     1)                             ;                  (39)
                                    2   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=±A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik   ∥L)

Meanwhile, if and only if
                                            B(βl     1)
                                         2    A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)·−C(βl     1)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2)>0                     (40)

or                                              B(βl     1)
                                             2   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=− C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)A(βl     2)                         (41)

do edge states exist at the frequenciesβsatisfying Eq. (39). In Fig.11(a), the range ofβcorresponding
to Eq. (39) appears as the set of points onλ=  0between a pair of neighboring blue and orange solid
                                                                          25
curves, in the intervals(β       (n−1)0   ,β(n)t   )and(β           (n)t ,β(n)0   ). This set of frequencies (i.e., solutions to Eq. (39))
have the same range with the corresponding set of frequencies for the square frame as given in Eq. (16),
and hence the same existence property (i.e., existence within each interval(β      (n−1)0   ,β(n)t   )and(β           (n)t ,β(n)0   ))
follows. Although the candidate frequencies of edge states are the same, the existence condition of edge
states for the kagome frame (the expressions (40) and (41)) is quite different from that for the square frame
(the expression (17)). First, we examine the set of frequencies that satisfy the conditions (39) and (40).hi
In Fig.11(a), the pink dotted curves represent functionhB(βl      1)i             −C(βl      1)A(βl      1) + C(βl      2)A(βl      2), and dark blue dashed curves
represent function2           A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2). For each point set between a pair of blue and orange solid curves,hihB(βl      1)i
when the values of the two functions                   −C(βl      1)A(βl      1) + C(βl      2)A(βl      2)and2A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2)have the same sign, the
condition (40) holds, and thus edge states exist at theseβ. Therefore, edge states exist at the frequency
intervals marked by yellow line segments in Fig.11(a). Then, the solutionsβ             r=0edge that satisfy Eq. (41) but
do not lie within the intervals of the yellow line segments are indicated by yellow stars. Several examples
are taken for illustration: selected edge states at the frequencyβ        r=0edge, in the interval(β     (1)t ,β(1)0   ), and in
the interval(β     (1)0 ,β(2)t   )(see Fig.11(a) for details) are demonstrated in Fig.13(a), (b)–(c), and (d)–(e),
respectively. The bending deformations are localized near the edges of the structure, which is typical for
edge states.
    In the following, we prove the conditions (39) and (40) for the existence of edge states.  Consider a
semi-infinite kagome lattice as shown in Fig.10(c), where we employ Eqs. (29) and (30) and attempt to
solve edge states whose energy are localized on the boundary and decay exponentially into the bulk. Letting
eik 2L =r, we obtain
                                                       θA(B,C)       = ΘA(B,C)      eimk 1Lrn.                               (42)

For edge states, the componentk  1 along the edge is real. We compare the the balance equations of the
bending moments at joint A in unit cells(m,1)and(m,2)(marked by blue stars in Fig.10(c)), which leads
toθ    (m,1)C      = 0. ThusΘ      C = 0, and it follows that

                                                                   θ(m,n)
                                                                    C       = 0.                                      (43)

Substituting Eq. (43) into the balance equations of the bending moments for joints A and B in unit cell
(m,n), we obtain

                                               ϵθ(m,n)              )                )
                                                  A       =t   1·θ (m,nB       +t   2·θ (m,nB      e−ik     1L,                          (44)
                                               ϵθ(m,n)              )                )
                                                  B       =t   1·θ (m,nA      +t   2·θ (m,nA      eik 1L,                           (45)
                     hB(βl      1)         i
whereϵ≡−2              A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2), which is also the eigenvalue of the dynamical matrix with all diagonal
elements set to zero;t         1≡−C(βl        1)/A(βl       1), andt         2≡−C(βl        2)/A(βl       2). By combining Eqs. (44) and (45), we
obtain the candidate frequencies where edge states of the kagome frame may occur, that is, the candidate

                                                                         26
Fig. 13.Edge modes of a kagome grid-like frame. (a) Edge state at frequencyβ           r=0edge. (b)–(c) Edge states corre-
sponding tok ∥L=πandk     ∥L= 0in the interval(β           (1)t ,β(1)0   )shown in Fig.11. (d)–(e) Edge states corresponding to
k∥L=πandk     ∥L= 0in the interval(β           (1)0 ,β(2)t   )shown in Fig.11.


frequencies are solutions to
                                                   λkagomeedge     =−ϵ±|t          1 +t   2eik 1L|= 0,                            (46)

which are precisely the solutions to Eq. (39); moreover, we obtain

                                                              θ(m,n)        )
                                                               B       =θ    (m,nA      eiϕ,                                   (47)

where
                                                            ϕ= arg t1 +t   2eik 1Lϵ    .                                  (48)

    Next, for joint C in unit cell(m,n)(highlighted with a yellow star in Fig.10(c)), the balance equation
of the bending moments is
                                         h  +1)                         i        h  )           )      i
                                     t2   θ(m,nA          +θ    (m−1,n+1)B +t   1  θ(m,nA      +θ    (m,nB= 0,                    (49)

which is rewritten as                     h
                                       t2  1 + ei(ϕ−k           1L) ir·θ   (m,n)                 )
                                                                     A      +t   11 + eiϕθ(m,nA       = 0,                    (50)
                                                                         27
and therefore we have                                         1 + eiϕ
                                          r=−  t1t2·      1 + ei(ϕ−k           1L)(1 + ei(ϕ−k           1L) ̸= 0).                      (51)

For simplicity, in the following we lett     1 = 1,t   2 =t. (For general cases in whicht        1̸= 1, analogous conclusions
can be reached by acknowledging the properties of the eigenvalues under scalar multiplication of a matrix,
and taking(t              1,t2,ϵ)7→(ct          1,ct2,cϵ).) From Eq. (48), we have

                                                          eiϕ  = sgn(ϵ)          1 +te     ik 1L|1 +te      ik 1L|.                                (52)

Therefore, whenϵ>0,                                          |1 +te      ik 1L|+ (1 +te      ik 1L)
                                                 r=−     1t   |1 +te      ik 1L|+ (t+ e −ik     1L)  ;                          (53)

whenϵ<0,                                                     |1 +te      ik 1L|−(1 +te        ik 1L)
                                                 r=−     1t   |1 +te      ik 1L|−(t+ e  −ik     1L)  .                          (54)

Here we discuss whether the modes are localized at the boundary by enumerating the sign oftand also the
sign ofϵ.

    •Case I:t>0,ϵ>0. Fig.14(a) shows the geometric relations of the parameters in the expression ofr
        (here we simply denotek             1Lask), and by using trigonometric relations we have

                                                     |r|=     sin(k−ϕ)               2    = sin k−ϕ2     .                        (55)
                                                                 sinϕ   ·   cos ϕcos k−ϕ2       sin ϕ2

        Whent >1(which is the case shown in Fig.14(a)), it holds thatk−ϕ < ϕ, and hence|r|<1,
        indicating that a mode localized at the boundary exists; on the other hand, when0<t<1, we have
        k−ϕ>ϕ, and hence|r|>1, indicating that no mode is localized at the boundary.

    •Case II:t>0,ϵ<0. In this case the geometric relations of the parameters in the expression ofrare
        shown in Fig.14(b), and we have

                                                    |r|=     sin(k−ϕ    ′)           2    = cos k−ϕ          ′2.                       (56)
                                                               sinϕ  ′  ·   sin ϕ′sin k−ϕ          ′2cos ϕ′2

        Whent>1(as is the case in Fig.14(b)), it holds thatk−ϕ            ′ <ϕ′, and hence|r|>1, indicating no
        localization at the boundary; on the other hand, when0< t <1, we havek−ϕ       ′ > ϕ′, and hence
        |r|<1, indicating that a mode is localized at the boundary.

    •Case III:t<0,ϵ>0. By a method similar to that illustrated in Fig.14, it is found that none of the
        modes exhibit localization properties.

    •Case IV:t<0,ϵ<0. The modes are localized at the boundaries.



                                                                          28
Fig. 14.Geometricrelationofparametersassociatedwiththedecaycoefficientrofthekagomeframe. Herek≡k                           1L.
(a) Whenϵ>0andt>1, the numerator[|1 +te                                                          ik 1L|+ (1 +te       ik 1L)]in Eq. (53) is indicated by the blue vector in
the complex plane, and the denominator[|1 +te                                  ik 1L|+ (t+ e −ik     1L)]is indicated by the purple vector. (b) When
ϵ<0andt>1, the numerator[|1 +te                                         ik 1L|−(1 +te         ik 1L)]in Eq. (54) is indicated by the blue vector in the complex
plane, and the denominator[|1 +te                                  ik 1L|−(t+ e  −ik     1L)]is indicated by the purple vector. Although both illustrations
implicitly assumek=k                     1L∈(0,π), for the opposite casek=k                             1L∈(−π,0), it suffices to note that|r|is invariant
underk            1L7→−k       1L.


Therefore, we arrive at the conclusion: if and only ift   2 > t1 andϵ >0, ort                 2 < t1 andϵ <0, topological
edge states exist at frequenciesβsolved from Eq. (39). The condition (40) is proved.
     In the above discussions, we have not yet considered the case ofr= 0(where the modes are completely
localized on the outermost layer of cells, with zero displacement in the bulk), i.e.,e       iϕ  =−1. From Eq. (47),
we obtainθ            B =−θ       A; substituting this into Eqs. (44) and (45) yieldsk                       1L= 0orπ, along with the existence
condition of edge states for the case ofr= 0:

                                                       −ϵ=t         1 +t   2    (k  1L= 0andϕ=π),                           (57)

                                                       −ϵ=t         1−t   2    (k  1L=πandϕ=π).                           (58)

Substituting Eq. (58) into the left-hand side of the condition (40), it follows that−ϵ·(t                             1−t   2) = (t  1−t   2)2 >0,
and hence the solutions to Eq. (58) must necessarily fall within the solution set of the condition (40), that
is, the solutionsβto Eq. (58) lie within (more precisely, lie at certain endpoints of) the yellow line segments
in Fig.11(a), as intersections of blue curves corresponding toλ                kagomeedge   atk    1L=πwith the axisλ= 0.
     However, Eq. (57) does not necessarily satisfy the condition (40) and thus requires additional discussions.
From the calculations in the next subsection, we find that the solutions to Eq. (57) for the edge-state
frequency are also solutions for the frequency of the bulk states corresponding toλ    Γ3  =λ   K3   =  0.  This

                                                                                 29
Fig. 15.Band structure of the kagome frame with(l                  1,l2) = (40 mm,50 mm)or(50 mm,40 mm). Inset shows the
first Brillouin zone.


indicates the existence of an entire bulk band (i.e., a flat band) at each of such frequencies, appearing in
Fig.11(b) as the intersections of coincident black solid and purple dashed curves with the horizontal axis.
Whent           1 +t   2 >0, Eq. (57) is produced from Eq. (46) by taking the negative sign, so the solutions to Eq. (57)
in Fig.11(a) are the intersections of the lower-half orange curves and the axisλ= 0; whent                                  1 +t   2 <0,
Eq. (57) corresponds to Eq. (46) with a positive sign, and thus the solutions to Eq. (57) in Fig.11(a) are the
intersections of the upper-half orange curves and the axisλ= 0. These solutions may or may not be within
the range given by the condition (40) (i.e., may or may not lie at endpoints of the yellow line segments in
Fig.11(a)), depending on whether|t                     1|>|t      2|or|t      1|<|t      2|. We identifyβwhich satisfy Eq. (57) but lie
outside the yellow line segments with yellow stars in Fig.11(a). Equation (57) is precisely the condition
(41) given at the beginning of this subsection. It is noted that the solutions to Eq. (57) render both the
numerator and denominator of Eq. (51) zero; formally, Eq. (50) holds for any value ofr. In fact, at the
solutionsβto Eq. (57), edge states and bulk states coexist.

4.3.  Bulk states in kagome frames
    From the expressions in Eq. (26), we obtain the eigenvalues of matrixH                   kagomeBloch  as
                                               vuut                                                                      √         !
            λ1,2   =−ϵ+        1 t1 +t   2±        9t  21 + 9t  22 +t   1t2−6 + 8 cosk    xL+ 16 cos kxL                   3k yL     ,    (59)
                              2                                                                                 2   cos       2

               λ3 =−ϵ−t            1−t   2.                                                                 (60)

The bulk bands are given byλ i  =  0(i =  1, 2, 3).  The dispersion diagram of the bulk bands for a
kagome frame with(l          1,l2) = (40 mm,50 mm)is presented in Fig.15. Whenβis fixed, the upper and lower
edges of the eigenvalue bands are attained at the pointΓ(i.e.,(k      x,ky)  =  (0,0)) and the pointK(i.e.,
                           3π  ) in the Brillouin zone. For pointΓ,
(k x,ky) =±   2π3L , 2√3L

                                                   λΓ1,2   =−ϵ+        12(t  1 +t   2±3|t       1 +t   2|);                           (61)
                                                                          30
for pointK,
                                                   λK1,2   =−ϵ+        12(t  1 +t   2±3|t       1−t   2|);                           (62)

λΓ3  =λ   K3 has the same value as one ofλ    Γ1,2 . Thus, the edges of the frequency bands for bulk states correspond
to the eigenvaluesλ          Γ1,2  (black solid curves in Fig.11(b)) orλ                K1,2  (purple dashed curves in Fig.11(b)) being
equal to zero. Comparing the values of Eqs. (61) and (62), it is concluded that whent                      1t2 >0, the outermost
edges of the eigenvalue bands at any specificβcorrespond toλ                Γ1,2 , which are black solid curves in Fig.11(b);
whent          1t2 <0, the outermost edges of the eigenvalue bands correspond toλ          K1,2 , i.e., purple dashed curves.
Heret         1t2  = C(βl      1)C(βl        2)A(βl      1)A(βl        2); since functionC(βl         i)is always positive forβ >0, and functionA(βl                                  1)A(βl       2)
changes its sign at eachβ   (n)0  , the associated wavevector (i.e., pointΓor pointK) of the outermost bulk band
edges (we exclude the flat bandλ          3 here) will change between neighboring intervals(β       (n−1)0   ,β(n)0   ).
    Asλ     3 is independent of the wavenumbersk  x andk   y, the frequency bands given byλ  3 = 0are flat bands.
Remarkably, in the kagome frame, there exists a large number of such flat bands (infinitely many, in theory),
due to the fact that in every frequency interval(β     (n−1)0   ,β(n)0   )lies one such band, as implied by the existence
property of Eq. (39) detailed earlier. These flat bands are depicted in Fig.11(b) ascoincidentblack solid
and purple dashed curves intersecting the horizontal axis.


4.4.  Summary of frequency ranges of states in kagome frames

    Finally, wesummarizethefrequencyrangesofthecorner, edgeandbulkstatesinkagomegrid-likeframes,
in an analogy with the tight-binding model of the breathing kagome lattice encountered in condensed matter
physics [56,58]. Fig.16illustrates the spectrum of the breathing kagome lattice (withϵbeing the energy
of the eigenstates) with respect tot    1/t2, wheret           1 andt       2 are the intracell and intercell hopping strengths
of the tight-binding lattice model; the same plot also dictates the existence of the three types of stateshB(βl      1)                        i
for the kagome grid-like frames at any specified frequencyβ, withϵdefined as−2                                            A(βl      1) + B(βl      2)A(βl      2), and
t1(2) defined as−  C(βl      1(2))A(βl      1(2)). In Fig.16, the dark blue line denotes corner states, which exist atϵ= 0in the
parameter range−1< t                1/t2 <1. Edge states exist in the pink regions and also at the lineϵ=−t                     1−t   2.
Bulk states exist in the gray regions, which also contains the lineϵ=−t                1−t   2.


4.5.  Robustness of topological corner states in kagome frames

    For higher-order kagome frames, although the existence criteria (39) and (40) for their edge states differ
from the existence criterion Eq. (17) for square frames, the candidate frequency ranges of edge states, i.e.,
Eqs. (16) and (39), are identical, as well as the frequencies of corner states (Eqs. (10) and (27)). Therefore,
as long as the condition|C(β          tl1)A(β   tl2)| =|C(β     tl2)A(β   tl1)|is not triggered, the corner states lie within
the bandgaps of the edge states, and the existence of the corner states remains unaltered, ensuring their
robustness.  As demonstrated in Fig.16, when the geometric parameters of the kagome grid-like frame
change, the higher-order topological corner states remain within the gaps of the edge states.
                                                                          31
Fig. 16.Spectrum of the modes in kagome lattice. Gray, pink and blue regions represent the ranges where bulk,hB(βl     1)                                         i
edge and corner states exist, respectively. For the kagome frames,ϵis defined as−2                                                         A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2), andt        1(2)
defined as−  C(βl     1(2))A(βl     1(2)).

Table  1.Summary of key analytical conclusions for topological modes for square and kagome frames.  Here
A(βl)≡1−coshβlcosβl,B(βl)≡sinhβlcosβl−coshβlsinβl,C(βl)≡sinhβl−sinβlare all analytical functions;
l1,l 2 are the lengths of alternately arranged beam segments andl        0 that of the vertical beam segments as in Figs.1
and10. The formulae with asterisks have been given in our previous work [27].


   Topological frame   Type of mode    Analytical results for frequencies ofmodes                 Existence condition for modes
                                                                              hB(βl     1)              i                                C(βl     1)<C(βl     2)
                                                                                 A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=
                                                                        C(βl     1)                                                     A(βl     1)     A(βl     2)
       Square frame      Edge state                      2±              A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)hB(β     tl1)A(βl     2) exp(ik    x(y)  L)iC(β    tl1)<C(β    tl2)

                                    Corner state∗                 2           A(β     tl1) + B(β     tl2)A(β     tl2)= 0                 A(β     tl1)hB(βl     1)A(β     tl2)i
                                                                                                                                     h  2   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)i·
                                                                              hB(βl     1)              i                              −C(βl     1)A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2)>0
                                                                                 A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=
                                                                         C(βl     1)                                                               or
      Kagome frame      Edge state                      2±                 A(βl     1) + C(βl     2)A(βl     2) exp(ik   ∥L)             hB(βl     1)             i
                                                                                                                                       2   A(βl     1) + B(βl     2)A(βl     2)=
                                                                            hB(β     tl1)              i                                C(β    tl1)−C(βl     1)A(βl     1)− C(βl     2)<C(β    tl2)A(βl     2)
                                    Corner state∗                 2           A(β     tl1) + B(β     tl2)A(β     tl2)= 0                 A(β     tl1)      A(β     tl2)


5. Summary of topological states in planar frames

     In Table1, we briefly summarize the frequency results and existence conditions for the edge states and
corner states in planar square and kagome frames, which are a class of higher-order topological continuum

                                                                                        32
structures. The formulae for the corner states of the square and kagome frames have been given in our
previous work [27]. The results are concise and in analytical form, applicable to all bands from low to high
frequencies, and may be used as a reference for applications.


6. Conclusions

    In this paper, the analytical method for characterizing the higher-order topological dynamics of the
continuum grid-like frames with complex spectra is proposed. We give the exact analytical expressions for
all the frequencies of topological corner states, edge states, and bulk states in square and kagome frames,
wherespectraloverlapbetweentopologicalcorner/edgestatesandbulkstatesoccursinsuchnon-1Dsystems.
Also, we present the existence conditions of edge and corner states in an analytical form, which are related
to the transitions of the 2D topological phases in higher-order continuum frames. Therefore, this enables
the identification of topological corner and edge states even within the densely distributed bulk states in
the frequency spectrum, which is challenging with usual numerical solving techniques. Meanwhile, we find
that the topological corner states must be within the bandgaps of edge states, unless topological transitions
occur, demonstrating the robustness of the higher-order topological corner states from the theoretical side.
Inadditionweverifybyfinite-elementsimulationsthathigher-ordertopologicalcornerstatespersistrobustly
underperturbationofvarioustypesofdefects. Furthermore,weextendourgrid-likeframetodemonstratethe
corner states at the interface of topological heterostructures. The clear identification of mode distributions
in the frequency spectra of grid-like frame structures contributes to the rigorous theoretical analysis of
higher-order topological dynamics in continuum systems, and the demonstration on the robustness of the
topological states facilitates potential applications of frame structures such as robust waveguides and safety
assessment in engineering [21,59–63].


CRediT authorship contribution statement

    Yimeng Sun:Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – orig-
inal draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization.Jiacheng Xing:Conceptualization, Methodology,
Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization.
Li-Hua Shao:Conceptualization, Resources, Validation, Writing – review & editing.Jianxiang Wang:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review &
editing, Funding acquisition.


Declaration of Competing Interest

    The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
                                                                33
Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.


Acknowledgements

    Y. S., J. X., and J. W. thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12232001)
for support of this work. We thank Dr. Hao Qiu from Suzhou Laboratory for helpful discussions.


References

 [1]S. D. Huber, Topological mechanics, Nat. Phys. 12 (2016) 621–623. doi:10.1038/nphys3801.

 [2]K. von Klitzing, T. Chakraborty, P. Kim, V. Madhavan, X. Dai, J. McIver, Y. Tokura, L. Savary,
     D. Smirnova, A. M. Rey, C. Felser, J. Gooth, X. Qi, 40 years of the quantum Hall effect, Nat. Rev.
     Phys. 2 (2020) 397–401. doi:10.1038/s42254-020-0209-1.

 [3]C. L. Kane, T. C. Lubensky, Topological boundary modes in isostatic lattices, Nat. Phys. 10 (2014)
     39–45. doi:10.1038/nphys2835.

 [4]Y. Chen, J. P. McInerney, P. N. Krause, J. L. Schneider, M. Wegener, X. Mao, Observation of floppy
     flexural modes in a 3D polarized maxwell beam, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 (2025) 086101. doi:10.1103/
     PhysRevLett.134.086101.

 [5]P. Wang, L. Lu, K. Bertoldi, Topological phononic crystals with one-way elastic edge waves, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) 104302. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.104302.

 [6]D. Zhao, M. Xiao, C. W. Ling, C. T. Chan, K. H. Fung, Topological interface modes in local resonant
     acoustic systems, Phys. Rev. B 98 (2018) 014110. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.98.014110.

 [7]H. Chen, H. Nassar, G. Huang, A study of topological effects in 1D and 2D mechanical lattices, J.
     Mech. Phys. Solids 117 (2018) 22–36. doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2018.04.013.

 [8]Y. Chen, X. Liu, G. Hu, Topological phase transition in mechanical honeycomb lattice, J. Mech. Phys.
     Solids 122 (2019) 54–68. doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2018.08.021.

 [9]X. Shi, I. Kiorpelidis, R. Chaunsali, V. Achilleos, G. Theocharis, J. Yang, Disorder-induced topological
     phase transition in a one-dimensional mechanical system, Phys. Rev. Res. 3 (2021) 033012. doi:10.
     1103/PhysRevResearch.3.033012.

[10]T.-L.Yang, Y.-Z.Wang, Halleffectandtopologicalphasetransitionofnonlinearelasticwavemetamate-
     rialswithlocalresonators, J.Mech.Phys.Solids193(2024)105889.doi:.10.1016/j.jmps.2024.105889
                                                              34
[11]A. Wang, C. Q. Chen, Static topological mechanics: from space-time duality to localized deformations,
     J. Mech. Phys. Solids 206 (2026) 106248. doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2025.106248.

[12]X. Huang, J. Lu, W. Deng, Z. Liu, Topological materials for elastic wave in continuum, Acta Mech.
     Sin. 39 (2023) 723041. doi:10.1007/s10409-023-23041-x.

[13]X. Mao, T. C. Lubensky, Maxwell lattices and topological mechanics, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
     Phys. 9 (2018) 413–433. doi:10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-033117-054235.

[14]D. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Mao, Topological edge floppy modes in disordered fiber networks, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 120 (2018) 068003. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.068003.

[15]J. Yin, M. Ruzzene, J. Wen, D. Yu, L. Cai, L. Yue, Band transition and topological interface modes in
     1D elastic phononic crystals, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 6806. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-24952-5.

[16]Muhammad, W. Zhou, C. Lim,  Topological edge modeling and localization of protected interface
     modes in 1D phononic crystals for longitudinal and bending elastic waves, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 159 (2019)
     359–372. doi:10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2019.05.020.

[17]M. I. N. Rosa, R. K. Pal, J. R. F. Arruda, M. Ruzzene, Edge states and topological pumping in spatially
     modulatedelasticlattices, Phys.Rev.Lett.123(2019)034301.doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.034301.

[18]H. Fan, B. Xia, L. Tong, S. Zheng, D. Yu, Elastic higher-order topological insulator with topologically
     protected corner states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 (2019) 204301. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.204301.

[19]W.Zhou, B.Wu, Z.Chen, W.Chen, C.Lim, J.Reddy, Activelycontrollabletopologicalphasetransition
     in homogeneous piezoelectric rod system, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 137 (2020) 103824. doi:10.1016/j.
     jmps.2019.103824.

[20]X.-Q. Zhang, J. Tang, T.-X. Ma, Y.-S. Wang, Multiple topological interface states in coupled phononic
     cavity chains, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 307 (2025) 110928. doi:10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2025.110928.

[21]Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, K. Zhang, G. Hu, Dirac degeneracy and elastic topological valley modes induced
     by local resonant states, Phys. Rev. B 101 (2020) 014101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.101.014101.

[22]W. Cheng, H. Zhang, Y. Wei, K. Wang, G. Hu, Elastic energy and polarization transport through
     spatial modulation, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 182 (2024) 105475. doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2023.105475.

[23]Q.Wu, H.Chen, X.Li, G.Huang, In-planesecond-ordertopologicallyprotectedstatesinelastickagome
     lattices, Phys. Rev. Appl. 14 (2020) 014084. doi:10.1103/PhysRevApplied.14.014084.



                                                              35
[24]G.Duan, S.Zheng, Z.-K.Lin, J.Jiao, J.Liu, Z.Jiang, B.Xia, Numericalandexperimentalinvestigation
     of second-order mechanical topological insulators, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 174 (2023) 105251. doi:10.
     1016/j.jmps.2023.105251.

[25]Y. Tang, W. Zhou, Y. Mai, Y. Chen, Z. Zhong, W. Chen,  Higher-order topological states and
     magnetic field control in elastic metamaterials,  Acta Mech. Sin. 42 (2026) 524537. doi:10.1007/
     s10409-024-24537-x.

[26]M. Xiao, Z. Zhang, C. Chan, Surface impedance and bulk band geometric phases in one-dimensional
     systems, Phys. Rev. X 4 (2014) 021017. doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.4.021017.

[27]Y. Sun, J. Xing, L.-H. Shao, J. Wang, The topological dynamics of continuum lattice grid structures,
     J. Mech. Phys. Solids 194 (2025) 105935. doi:10.1016/j.jmps.2024.105935.

[28]W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, Quantized electric multipole insulators, Science 357
     (2017) 61–66. doi:10.1126/science.aah6442.

[29]F. Schindler, A. M. Cook, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, S. S. P. Parkin, B. A. Bernevig, T. Neupert,
     Higher-order topological insulators, Sci. Adv. 4 (2018) eaat0346. doi:10.1126/sciadv.aat0346.

[30]M. Ezawa, Higher-order topological insulators and semimetals on the breathing kagome and pyrochlore
     lattices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) 026801. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.026801.

[31]B.-Y. Xie, H.-F. Wang, H.-X. Wang, X.-Y. Zhu, J.-H. Jiang, M.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Chen, Second-order pho-
     tonic topological insulator with corner states, Phys. Rev. B 98 (2018) 205147. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.
     98.205147.

[32]W. A. Benalcazar, T. Li, T. L. Hughes,  Quantization of fractional corner charge inC     n-symmetric
     higher-order topological crystalline insulators, Phys. Rev. B 99 (2019) 245151. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.
     99.245151.

[33]B. Xie, H.-X. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Zhan, J.-H. Jiang, M. Lu, Y. Chen, Higher-order band topology,
     Nat. Rev. Phys. 3 (2021) 520–532. doi:10.1038/s42254-021-00323-4.

[34]X. Xiang, Y.-G. Peng, F. Gao, X. Wu, P. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Ni, X.-F. Zhu, Demonstration of acoustic
     higher-order topological Stiefel-Whitney semimetal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132 (2024) 197202. doi:10.1103/
     PhysRevLett.132.197202.

[35]M.-H.Ling, P. Wu, Y.-G.Peng, X.-F.Zhu, Twist-inducedall-flat-band higher-orderacoustic topological
     insulator, Adv. Mater. 38 (2026) e19287. doi:10.1002/adma.202519287.


                                                               36
[36]G. Ma, M. Xiao, C. T. Chan, Topological phases in acoustic and mechanical systems, Nat. Rev. Phys.
     1 (2019) 281–294. doi:10.1038/s42254-019-0030-x.

[37]Y. Wu, M. Yan, Z.-K. Lin, H.-X. Wang, F. Li, J.-H. Jiang, On-chip higher-order topological microme-
     chanical metamaterials, Sci. Bull. 66 (2021) 1959–1966. doi:10.1016/j.scib.2021.06.024.

[38]F. Liu, K. Wakabayashi, Novel topological phase with a zero Berry curvature, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118
     (2017) 076803. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.076803.

[39]X. Zhang, H.-X. Wang, Z.-K. Lin, Y. Tian, B. Xie, M.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Chen, J.-H. Jiang, Second-order
     topology and multidimensional topological transitions in sonic crystals, Nat. Phys. 15 (2019) 582–588.
     doi:10.1038/s41567-019-0472-1.

[40]D. Obana, F. Liu, K. Wakabayashi, Topological edge states in the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model, Phys.
     Rev. B 100 (2019) 075437. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.075437.

[41]S. Huybrechts, S. W. Tsai, Analysis and behavior of grid structures, Compos. Sci. Technol. 56 (1996)
     1001–1015. doi:10.1016/0266-3538(96)00063-2.

[42]R.-T. Wang, J.-S. Lin, Vibration of multi-span Timoshenko frames due to moving loads, J. Sound Vib.
     212 (1998) 417–434. doi:10.1006/jsvi.1997.1437.

[43]P. G. Martinsson, A. B. Movchan, Vibrations of lattice structures and phononic band gaps, Q. J. Mech.
     Appl. Math. 56 (2003) 45–64. doi:10.1093/qjmam/56.1.45.

[44]C. J. Hunt, F. Morabito, C. Grace, Y. Zhao, B. K. S. Woods, A review of composite lattice structures,
     Compos. Struct. 284 (2022) 115120. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2021.115120.

[45]C.-W. Chen, R. Chaunsali, J. Christensen, G. Theocharis, J. Yang, Corner states in a second-order
     mechanical topological insulator, Commun. Mater. 2 (2021) 62. doi:10.1038/s43246-021-00170-x.

[46]Z. Wang, Q. Wei, An elastic higher-order topological insulator based on kagome phononic crystals, J.
     Appl. Phys. 129 (2021) 035102. doi:10.1063/5.0031377.

[47]J. Yi, C. Q. Chen, Delocalization and higher-order topology in a nonlinear elastic lattice, New J. Phys.
     26 (2024) 063004. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/ad4f07.

[48]A. S. Phani, J. Woodhouse, N. A. Fleck, Wave propagation in two-dimensional periodic lattices, J.
     Acoust. Soc. Am. 119 (2006) 1995–2005. doi:10.1121/1.2179748.

[49]H.Liu, Q.Zhang, K.Zhang, G.Hu, H.Duan, Designing3Ddigitalmetamaterialforelasticwaves: From
     elastic wave polarizer to vibration control, Adv. Sci. 6 (2019) 1900401. doi:10.1002/advs.201900401.

                                                               37
[50]S. S. Rao, Vibration of Continuous Systems, 2nd ed., Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2019.

[51]W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer, A. J. Heeger, Solitons in polyacetylene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 1698–1701.
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.42.1698.

[52]J. Zak, Berry’s phase for energy bands in solids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989) 2747–2750. doi:10.1103/
     .PhysRevLett.62.2747

[53]R. Resta, Macroscopic polarization in crystalline dielectrics: the geometric phase approach, Rev. Mod.
     Phys. 66 (1994) 899–915. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.66.899.

[54]B.-Y. Xie, G.-X. Su, H.-F. Wang, H. Su, X.-P. Shen, P. Zhan, M.-H. Lu, Z.-L. Wang, Y.-F. Chen, Vi-
     sualization of higher-order topological insulating phases in two-dimensional dielectric photonic crystals,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 (2019) 233903. URL:https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.
     233903. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.233903.

[55]W. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Hao, J. Dang, S. Xiao, S. Shi, H. Ni, Z. Niu, C. Wang, K. Jin, X. Zhang, X. Xu,
     Low-threshold topological nanolasers based on the second-order corner state, Light Sci. Appl. 9 (2020)
     109. doi:10.1038/s41377-020-00352-1.

[56]X. Ni, M. Weiner, A. Alù, A. B. Khanikaev,   Observation of higher-order topological acoustic
     states protected by generalized chiral symmetry,   Nat. Mater. 18 (2019) 113–120. doi:10.1038/
     s41563-018-0252-9.

[57]F. Gao, Y.-G. Peng, X. Xiang, X. Ni, C. Zheng, S. Yves, X.-F. Zhu, A. Alù, Acoustic higher-order
     topological insulators induced by orbital-interactions, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 2312421. doi:10.1002/
     adma.202312421.

[58]H. Xue, Y. Yang, F. Gao, Y. Chong, B. Zhang, Acoustic higher-order topological insulator on a kagome
     lattice, Nat. Mater. 18 (2019) 108–112. doi:10.1038/s41563-018-0251-x.

[59]V. V. Vasiliev, A. F. Razin, Anisogrid composite lattice structures for spacecraft and aircraft applica-
     tions, Compos. Struct. 76 (2006) 182–189. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2006.06.025.

[60]V. V. Vasiliev, V. A. Barynin, A. F. Razin, Anisogrid composite lattice structures – development and
     aerospace applications, Compos. Struct. 94 (2012) 1117–1127. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2011.10.
     023.

[61]F.Kiakojouri, V.DeBiagi, B.Chiaia, M.R.Sheidaii, Progressivecollapseofframedbuildingstructures:
     Current knowledge and future prospects, Eng. Struct. 206 (2020) 110061. doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.
     2019.110061.

                                                               38
[62]Y. Jiang, D. Yan, J. Wang, L.-H. Shao, P. Sharma,  The giant flexoelectric effect in a luffa plant-
     based sponge for green devices and energy harvesters, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120 (2023) e2311755120.
     doi:10.1073/pnas.2311755120.

[63]X. Wang, S. Sarkar, S. Gonella, X. Mao, Topological mechanical metamaterial for robust and ductile
     one-way fracturing, Nat. Commun. 17 (2026) 2420. doi:10.1038/s41467-026-69026-7.






















































                                                               39