Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly
Correlated Electron Systems

                   Kimihiro Yamazaki1,2, Takuya Konishi1,3, Yoshinobu Kawahara1,3
                   1 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Osaka,
                   1-5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan
                   2 Fujitsu Limited, 4-1-1 Kamikodanaka, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki-shi, Kanagawa, Japan
                   3 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku,
                   Tokyo, Japan
                   E-mail:{k-yamazaki,  konishi,  kawahara}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

                   Abstract.
                       Recent  advances  in  neural  network  quantum  states  (NQS)  have  enabled  high-
                   accuracy predictions for complex quantum many-body systems such as strongly corre-
                   lated electron systems.  However, the computational cost remains prohibitive, making
                   exploration of the diverse parameters of interaction strengths and other physical param-
                   eters inefficient.  While transfer learning has been proposed to mitigate this challenge,
                   achieving generalization to large-scale systems and diverse parameter regimes remains
                   difficult.  To address this limitation, we propose a novel curriculum learning framework
                   based on transfer learning for NQS. This facilitates efficient and stable exploration
                   across a vast parameter space of quantum many-body systems.  In addition, by inter-
                   preting NQS transfer learning through a perturbative lens, we demonstrate how prior
                   physical knowledge can be flexibly incorporated into the curriculum learning process.
                   We also propose Pairing-Net, an architecture to practically implement this strategy for
                   strongly correlated electron systems, and empirically verify its effectiveness.  Our results
                   show an approximately 200-fold speedup in computation and a marked improvement in
                   optimization stability compared to conventional methods.

                   Keywords:  Curriculum Learning, Transfer Learning, Quantum Many-Body Systems,
                   Strongly  Correlated  Electron  Systems,  Variational  Monte  Carlo,  Neural  Network
                   Quantum States, Perturbation Theory
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  2

1.  Introduction

Obtaining quantum states of various quantum many-body systems is one of the most
important  problems  in  physics.   A  quantum  many-body  system  consists  of  multiple
interacting particles, and its properties are governed by the quantum state.  Among
these systems, strongly correlated electron systems are known to be particularly difficult
to calculate those quantum states where many-body effects (i.e., electron correlation)
play a crucial role [1].  Such a strong correlation gives rise to diverse phenomena, e.g.,
magnetism  [2]  and  high-temperature  superconductivity  [3].   Although  the  Hubbard
model  [4]  is  widely  studied  as  a  prototypical  model  of  strongly  correlated  electron
systems, capturing its full complexity remains a grand challenge.
      To tackle quantum many-body problems, methods utilizing neural network quantum
states  (NQS)  [5]  have  recently  garnered  significant  attention.   NQS  employ  highly
expressive neural networks to represent quantum states, achieving high computational
accuracy even for strongly correlated electron systems [6]. However, NQS often suffer from
high computational costs and potential instability.  In addition, the NQS of quantum
many-body  systems  can  be  viewed  as  a  function  of  various  parameters  such  as  the
number of electrons and the strength of interactions, with different regimes of quantum
phases.  Therefore,  exploration of quantum states across these regions is crucial but
computationally expensive.  To alleviate these issues, transfer learning approaches have
been  proposed  [7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13];  however,  their  effectiveness  remains  limited,
especially for strongly correlated electron systems.
      In this work, we aim to establish a machine learning method that significantly reduces
the computational burden of exhaustively exploring NQS under diverse parameter regimes
(e.g., varying electron numbers and interaction strengths).  To this end, we propose a
novel curriculum learning framework for the exhaustive exploration of multiple physical
parameters.  Conventional approaches suffer from prohibitive inefficiencies in such cases.
In contrast, our method leverages the strategic iterative application of transfer learning
for NQS, enabling efficient and stable exploration across multiple physical parameters.
Also, we provide a physical interpretation of this transfer learning process through the
lens of perturbation theory:  A physics methodology that incrementally renormalizes
information from a simpler model to a more complex one.  This perspective offers a
clear physical interpretation of zero-shot learning and fine-tuning within the context
of transfer learning.  Building these insights,  we propose Pairing-Net,  a transferable
NQS architecture that demonstrates how our curriculum learning framework can be
practically applied to strongly correlated electron systems.  Through several numerical
experiments, we have demonstrated that our method can efficiently and stably explore
a broad range of electronic correlation regimes in strongly correlated electron systems.
Our method is applicable to larger systems compared to the previous study [9], achieving
over 200-fold speedup in computation with high computational stability.  Furthermore,
by conducting several performance evaluations of transfer learning, we confirmed that
our method can acquire the high generalization performance in the context of electronic
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  3

correlations.  These results suggest that our approach represents a promising step toward
applying transfer learning in strongly correlated electron systems, particularly within
the framework of the Hubbard model.
     The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  In  Section  2,  we  provide
background  on  the  quantum  many-body  problem  and  introduce  NQS.  In  Section  3,
we discuss the limitations of previous works employing transfer learning to improve
the computational efficiency of NQS. In Section 4, we detail our curriculum learning
method,  designed  to  address  these  limitations.   In  Section  5,  we  provide  a  physical
interpretation of our method by examining the connection between transfer learning
and perturbation theory.  In Section 6, we introduce Pairing-Net, an architecture for
practically implementing our curriculum learning in strongly correlated electron systems.
Numerical experiments validating the effectiveness of our method are shown in Section 7,
and  finally  we  conclude  the  study  in  Section  8.   Appendices  include  an  overview  of
perturbation theory, and the details and additional results of the numerical experiments.

2.  Background

2.1.  Quantum Many-Body Problem and Strongly Correlated Electron Systems

The quantum many-body problem, meaning here the problem of obtaining quantum
states in a quantum many-body system, is essentially reduced to solving the following
eigenvalue problem for a Hamiltonian operator  ˆH : H→ H:
                                              ˆH|Ψ⟩ =E|Ψ⟩,                                                     (1)

where H is a Hilbert space,|Ψ⟩∈ H is an eigenvector (quantum state) corresponding to
the Hamiltonian operator andE∈ R is the eigen-energy corresponding to the eigenvector
|Ψ⟩.  Eq. (1) implies that the quantum state|Ψ⟩ of the system is essentially determined
by the Hamiltonian.
     The Hamiltonian operator is frequently approximated by employing a suitable finite
basis set (e.g., a finite set of Fock states{|x⟩}), which is known as an effective Hamiltonian.
The total number of bases, denoted by NB, corresponds to the dimension of the effective
Hamiltonian, i.e.,  ˆH∈ CNB×NB.  The restriction of the system to a finite-dimensional
subspace  corresponding  to  a  specific  energy  range  renders  it  numerically  tractable,
thereby reducing computational costs.  Furthermore, the effective Hamiltonian can often
be described as a function of physical parametersλ characterizing the system’s properties,
denoted as  ˆH(λ).  The dimension ofλ, e.g., interaction strengths and the number of
particles in the system, varies depending on the choice of an effective Hamiltonian.
     The Hubbard model is a representative prototypical model to represent strongly
correlated electron systems, and has been widely studied for almost half a century in
physics [4], whose effective Hamiltonian is given by:
                        ˆH(λ) =−tX         X                              NX
                                                 ˆc†iσˆcjσ + H.c.  +U         ˆni↑ˆni↓,                         (2)
                                      ⟨i,j⟩ σ                            i=1
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  4

where ˆc†iσ (ˆciσ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron with spinσ∈{↑,↓}
at the spatial coordinateri∈ R3 of the i-th lattice site, and ˆniσ≡ ˆc†iσˆciσ is the electron
number operator.  H.c.  denotes the Hermitian conjugate of the preceding term,  i.e.,
ˆc†jσˆciσ. t∈ R is the hopping integral (transition probability) of electrons between nearest-
neighbor lattice sites, and U∈ R is the on-site Coulomb repulsion interaction between
electrons on the same lattice site. N∈ N is the number of electrons, and the system size
is determined by the number of lattice sites, M∈ N.
     The difficulty of solving the quantum many-body problem for the Hubbard model can
be understood through the eigenvalue problem (1).  For the Hubbard model of electron
systems, NB  = (2M)!/(2M−N)!N!.  In the case of a large-scale (M≫ 1) and near
half-filling, where the electron density  ˜N≡N/M  equals 1, NB increases exponentially,
resulting in a considerably high-dimensional optimization problem.  Furthermore, both
electron itinerancy and localization compete near half-filling as the ratio of Coulomb
interaction  to  electron  hopping,   ˜U ≡ U/t,  changes,  leading  to  complex  electron
correlations.  This means that the physical parameters controlling the electron correlation
in the model can be written asλ≡ ( ˜N, ˜U)∈ R2.  The physical interpretation of these
parameters can be found in Appendix A.
     In experimental investigations, the analysis of variations in  ˜U  or  ˜N  corresponds, for
example, to examining variations in the quantum state resulting from crystal structure
deformations  [14,  15]  or  carrier  doping  [16,  17],  respectively.   Therefore,  performing
such analyses with high numerical accuracy and efficiency has emerged as a significant
practical challenge.

2.2.  Variational Monte Carlo Method and Neural Network Quantum States
The variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method [18] is often applied to find the quantum
states for the lowest eigenvalue of Eq. (1), which is called the ground state, for effective
Hamiltonians.  This method offers advantages over other methods in terms of applicability
to large-scale systems and the fact that it is not directly hampered by the fermionic
sign problem that plagues auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo (AF-QMC) [19].  In the
VMC method, a quantum state|Ψθ⟩ is parameterized by variational parameters θ.  The
VMC method then determines the variational parameters θ that minimize the energy
expectation value Eθ =⟨Ψθ| ˆH(λ)|Ψθ⟩/⟨Ψθ|Ψθ⟩, based on the Rayleigh-Ritz variational
principle:                                      P
                                 E0≤Eθ =           x|Ψθ(x)|2E(loc)Pθ    (x)

                                                        x|Ψθ(x)|2   ,                                      (3)
where E0∈ R denotes the minimum eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian, corresponding to
the ground state energy.  Ψθ(x) represents the wave function, defined as the coefficient
Ψθ(x)≡⟨x|Ψθ⟩ obtained by expanding|Ψθ⟩ in the basis set{|x⟩} as|Ψθ⟩ =Px Ψθ(x)|x⟩.
Then, the squared wave function,|Ψθ(x)|2, provides a value proportional to the probability
density corresponding to the basis|x⟩.  In this case, Eθ is calculated as the expectation
value of the local energy E(loc)θ    (x)≡Px′⟨x| ˆH(λ)|x′⟩Ψθ(x′)/Ψθ(x), using|Ψθ(x)|2 as the
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  5

probability density.
     Eq.  (3)  can  be  viewed,  in  the  context  of  machine  learning,  as  an  optimization
problem for the energy expectation value parameterized by the variational parameters
θ.   In  the  VMC  method, Eθ  is  minimized  using  stochastic  reconfiguration  (natural
gradient)  method  [20,  21].   However,  for  high-complexity  parameters, NB  increases
exponentially, making it difficult to compute the full summation over the bases in the
energy expectation value.  Therefore, Eθ = Ex∼|Ψθ(x)|2[E(loc)θ    (x)] is approximated using
the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm [22] based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC):

                                                    NMCX
                                      Eθ≈    1NMC        E(loc)θ    (xs),                                            (4)
                                                     s=1
where NMC  represents the number of Monte Carlo samples. xs  denotes each sample,
which is often sampled from the real-space configuration of the particles.  Thus, the Eθ
can be efficiently calculated even with a vast number of bases.  However, conventional
VMC methods suffer from a critical drawback:  The functional form of the wave function
|Ψθ⟩ must be artificially designed and the validity of this design significantly impacts
the results.
     Neural network quantum states (NQS) [5] represent a groundbreaking approach
that enables more expressive and flexible optimization by representing the functional
form of|Ψθ⟩ with a neural network.  However, the VMC method using NQS involves
an optimization problem with a vast number of variational parameters, leading to high
computational costs and inherent instability.  Furthermore, conventional VMC-based
approaches necessitate independent execution of computationally expensive optimization
calculations for each physical parameterλ.  Consequently, as the number of physical
parameters  under  consideration  increases,  the  computational  burden  scales  linearly,
resulting in a highly inefficient exploration.  These problems are particularly pronounced
for complex quantum many-body systems such as strongly correlated electron systems.

3.  Related Works

Conventional VMC-based NQS methods have been hampered by high computational
costs and numerical instability.  While recent works have demonstrated the potential
of  transfer  learning  to  mitigate  these  issues  across  various  quantum  many-body
systems [7, 8, 10, 11, 12], the effectiveness of transfer learning in this context remains
limited.
     Moreover,  transfer  learning  methods  have  recently  shown  promise  for  efficient
exploration  of  diverse  physical  properties  across  vast  parameter  spaces  in  quantum
many-body systems [9, 13].  However, existing methods based on multi-task learning loss
functions [9] exhibit limitations in generalization performance and large-scale systems.
Recent work has also demonstrated the effectiveness of fine-tuning for exploring diverse
quantum phases [13]; however, identifying effective fine-tuning conditions necessary for
exploration remains an open challenge.  Furthermore, applications to strongly correlated
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  6

electron systems necessitate satisfying the antisymmetry requirement of the wave function
under fermionic particle exchange, demanding further innovations in transferable NQS
architectures.
     Finally, we remark on the relationship between existing fine-tuning methods [7, 8,
10, 11, 12, 13] and the proposed method.  Our method based on curriculum learning
aims  for  efficient  and  stable  exploration  on  the  vast  physical  parameter  space λ  by
iteratively fine-tuning in a “proper” order.  However, obtaining the appropriate order
of  fine-tuning  is  not  straightforward  in  the  existing  methods.   To  address  this,  we
demonstrate that the transfer learning can be interpreted as perturbation theory in
physics, which provides a guideline for determining the appropriate fine-tuning order.
This enables the establishment of an appropriate order in our curriculum learning.

4.  Curriculum Learning for Quantum Many-Body Problem

Here we propose a novel curriculum learning framework aimed at improving the efficiency
and stability of exploration of NQS across diverse parameters for quantum many-body
systems.

4.1.  Transfer Learning with NQS
We formalize the transfer learning of NQS, a crucial component of our proposed method.
Conventional approaches with VMC necessitate independent training of NQS for each
of the numerous physical parameters.  Consequently, the exploration of these numerous
parameters is computationally prohibitive.  Our approach overcomes this limitation by
employing NQS architectures capable of transfer learning, specifically fine-tuning pre-
trained NQS across two different physical parametersλ,λ′.  The NQS architecture can
be any architecture that enables knowledge transfer between arbitrary distinct physical
parameters; Section 6 introduces Pairing-Net designed for strongly correlated electron
systems.  In the following, we introduce transfer learning (pre-training and fine-tuning)
utilizing these transferable NQS.
     The task and transfer learning are defined as follows:
Task:    TaskT (λ) is defined as the problem of obtaining the ground-state NQS|Ψθ(λ)⟩
by solving the optimization problem (3), where the loss function is the energy expectation
value from Eq. (4) for the Hamiltonian  ˆH(λ) with physical parameterλ.  This is referred
to as VMC calculation.

Pre-Training  and  Fine-Tuning:    Let the pre-training task beT (λ).  Then,  the fine-
tuningF(λ→λ′) to the target taskT (λ′) can be formulated as follows.  First, we define
the pre-trained NQS as the initial state:
                                          |Ψθ(0)(λ′)⟩≡|Ψθ(λ)⟩.                                                 (5)

Fine-tuning is then defined as the operation of getting the ground-state NQS|Ψθ(λ′)⟩
through VMC calculation for the target Hamiltonian  ˆH(λ′), using this initial state.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  7

Algorithm 1 Explorative Curriculum Learning
Input:  Hamiltonians{ ˆHk}Kk=1
Parameter:  Variational parameters of NQS{θk}Kk=1
Output:  Trained NQS{|Ψθk⟩}Kk=1
 1:  for k = 1,··· ,K do
 2:     if k = 1 then
 3:         # Pre-Training:T (λ1)
 4:         Compute|Ψθ1⟩ by VMC calculation with  ˆH1
 5:     else
 6:         # k-th Fine-Tuning:F(λk−1→λk)
 7:         Let|Ψθ(0)
                   k ⟩ =|Ψθk−1⟩
 8:         Compute|Ψθk⟩ by VMC calculation with  ˆHk
 9:     end if
10:  end for


4.2.  Curriculum Learning Algorithm
     Here we propose a novel curriculum learning approach that enables efficient and
stable exhaustive exploration through iterative transfer learning.  Suppose that we are
first given a set of K  physical parameters in the parameter space ofλ of our interest
based on physical prior knowledge.  We next determine an order of these parameters
and obtain an ordered set of the parameters{λk}Kk=1.  Then, our curriculum learning
approach iteratively performs transfer learning for λ1,λ2,··· ,λK  in this order.  For
instance, in real materials, task sets—which represent a challenging domain in strongly
correlated electron systems—may encompass monotonic variations of  ˜U  that result from
crystal structure deformations induced by pressure, among other factors [14, 15].  Our
method aims to improve computational efficiency and stability in such scenarios.  While
more complex task sets (e.g., simultaneous variation of multiple physical parameters) can
be envisaged, their practicality warrants further discussion.  For simplicity, we denote
the Hamiltonian for the physical parameterλk as  ˆHk≡  ˆH(λk) hereafter.  Similarly, we
simplify the variational parameters as θk≡θ(λk).
     This  curriculum  learning  algorithm  is  presented  in  Algorithm  1.   Initially,  pre-
training is performed on a relatively simple task,T (λ1), which can be determined based
on physical intuition.  For instance, the computational complexity of quantum many-
body systems can be determined using quantitative metrics such as the V-Score [23].
Subsequently, efficient transfer learningF(λk−1→ λk) is iteratively performed by a
proper  order.   This  iterative  process  of  transfer  learning  is  analogous  to  curriculum
learning [24],  a known method for improving the stability and efficiency of learning,
effects which we expect to be similarly observed in our algorithm.  The algorithm is
employed to exhaustively explore the task set, starting from a simple initial task and
encompassing even challenging, strongly correlated regimes.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  8

     A key issue of our approach is how to determine the order of parameters{λk}Kk=1.
In the next section, we propose a novel physical perspective to address this challenge.

5.  Perturbation Theory Perspective

This section demonstrates that the above transfer learning (or curriculum learning with
K  =  2)  can be interpreted as  perturbation  theory.  This  interpretation reveals  that
transfer learning constitutes a rigorous numerical method grounded in the fundamental
principles of renormalization in theoretical physics.  Furthermore,  we show that the
energy expectation obtained via zero-shot learning for NQS is equivalent to the first-order
approximation in perturbation theory.  We also demonstrate that transfer learning for
NQS serves as a numerical method for calculating higher-order terms in the perturbation
expansion.  Finally,  we show that this connection to perturbation theory provides a
guideline to determine the task execution order in the curriculum learning.

5.1.  Transfer Learning as Perturbation Method

In  quantum  mechanics,  perturbation  theory  provides  a  theoretical  framework  for
describing how quantum states and physical quantities change in response to perturbations
in the Hamiltonian (See Appendix B).
     First, we consider the case where a perturbation of the Hamiltonian arises due to a
change in the physical parametersνk≡λk−λk−1:

                                            ˆVk≡  ˆHk−  ˆHk−1.                                                   (6)

The pre-training task is reinterpreted as the task of obtaining the NQS|Ψθk−1⟩ for the
unperturbed Hamiltonian  ˆHk−1, whereT (λk−1) is assumed to be relatively easily solvable
and corresponds to the “easy” task in transfer learning.  The target task for fine-tuning
can then be interpreted as the task of obtaining the NQS for the perturbed Hamiltonian
ˆHk.  Generally, the perturbed Hamiltonian is more difficult to solve than the unperturbed
one.  This allows transfer learning to be reinterpreted as a process of “renormalization”
in the change in the wave function|δΨθk⟩ due to the influence of the perturbation into
the unperturbed state|Ψθk−1⟩.

5.2.  First Order Perturbation Energy from Zero-Shot Learning
Here, we provide a physical interpretation of the initial value of the energy expectation
during  fine-tuning  (which  corresponds  to  the  zero-shot  prediction  in  the  context  of
transfer  learning)  by  framing  the  transfer  learning  of  quantum  many-body  systems
within the framework of perturbation theory.
     First,  the eigenvalue equation of Eq. (1) corresponding to the pre-training task
T (λk−1) can be written as:

                                      ˆHk−1|Ψθk−1⟩ =Eθk−1|Ψθk−1⟩,                                          (7)
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                  9

where|Ψθk−1⟩  and Eθk−1  are  the  ground-state  NQS  and  energy  for  the  unperturbed
Hamiltonian, respectively.  In fine-tuningF(λk−1→λk), the initial value of this NQS is
set to|Ψθ(0)
           k ⟩≡|Ψθk−1⟩.  In this case, the energy expectation value at zero-shot prediction,
Eθ(0)
   k  , is given by:
                                  Eθ(0)
                                     k   =Eθk−1 +⟨Ψθk−1| ˆVk|Ψθk−1⟩⟨Ψθk−1|Ψθk−1⟩ ,                                      (8)
where the second term on the right-hand side corresponds to the first-order perturbation
energy in perturbation theory (See Appendix B). Thus, zero-shot prediction renormalizes
the  effects  of  first-order  perturbation.     In  physics,  it  is  known  that  for  simple
systems with small perturbations, the first-order perturbation provides a sufficiently
accurate approximation.  This corresponds to the pre-trained NQS exhibiting sufficient
generalization capability for the target task.  Therefore, we can introduce the accuracy of
the first-order perturbation approximation Eθ(0)
                                                          k   for energy as a measure for the model
generalization performance.
     Furthermore, this interpretation allows us to view the process as renormalizing the
effects of higher-order (second-order and above) perturbations.  In general, higher-order
perturbations must be considered when dealing with complex models, but their analytical
calculation is often intractable.  While recent work has proposed a method for numerically
calculating the effects of second-order perturbation using continuous-time quantum Monte
Carlo [25], it cannot be extended to higher-order terms.  In contrast, our transfer learning
approach using NQS provides a method for numerical renormalization, in principle, in all
higher-order perturbation terms through fine-tuning.  This interpretation also illustrates
that our method clearly goes beyond the conventional scope of perturbation theory.

5.3.  Curriculum Rule
Now, we establish a rule to determine the parameter order in the curriculum learning
framework for efficient exploration of the diverse parameter space{λk} leveraging the
aforementioned interpretation based on perturbation theory.
     Consider  a  set  of  parameters {λk}Kk=1.    The  curriculum  order  is  defined  as
λ1,λ2,··· ,λK.    The  order  of  the  parameter  set  can  be  determined  based  on  the
perturbation theory interpretation as follows.  Considering λk−1  andλk  (k > 1), the
difference in their parameters is given byνk =λk−λk−1. νk  induces a perturbation
term  ˆVk in Eq. (6).  In perturbation theory, it is assumed that a smaller parameter change
results in a smaller perturbation term  ˆVk.  Therefore,|νk|≪ 1 implies that fine-tuning
to correct the deviation|δΨk⟩ becomes easier.  Using this observation, the criterion to
determine the order of K− 1 parameters from the initial parameterλ1 is given by:

                          |λk−λk±1|≤|λk−λl| (l̸=k,k± 1, k> 1).                             (9)

This criterion indicates that selecting parameters such that transfer learning proceeds
to the nearest neighboring parameter is optimal (cf.  Fig. 1).  Since we assume a single-
axis variation of a physically meaningful parameter set as described in Section 4.2, this
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                10









                  Figure 1.  Illustration of the parameter order in curriculum learning.  Circles and
                  the filled one represent possible targets and the pre-training task, respectively, in the
                  parameter space of λ.  This illustrates that iteratively performing transfer learning
                  to the nearest neighboring parameter in the space is crucial for efficient and stable
                  curriculum learning.


criterion with the L1 norm properly determines the task order.  We remark that, although
Eq. (9) is derived under a perturbative assumption, empirical evidence shows that the
same nearest-neighbor curriculum remains effective even in near-critical regimes when
the parameter increment is sufficiently small; see  Appendix I.
      Thus, our approach based on this curriculum rule can be regarded as achieving
significant improvements in computational efficiency and stability by integrating the two
techniques commonly employed for strongly correlated electron systems, i.e., the VMC
method and the perturbation method.

6.  Pairing-Net

In this section, we introduce Pairing-Net, a transferable NQS architecture capable of
performing transfer and curriculum learning for strongly correlated electron systems.
      Existing approaches require independent training of NQS for each of the K tasks in
the given task set{T (λk)}Kk=1.  For the Hubbard model, this corresponds to exploring K
distinct electron correlation regimes controlled by{λk}Kk=1.  Independently computing
these  tasks  for  exhaustive  exploration  is  computationally  prohibitive.   Pairing-Net
overcomes these challenges by employing an NQS architecture designed to enable the
transfer of electron correlation knowledge from one physical parameter setλk−1 to another
λk (Fig. 2).  We assume here that the lattice size is fixed at Mk =M  (k = 1,...,K).
      First, it is empirically known that trial wave functions for strongly correlated electron
systems require two key components [6]:  (i) antisymmetry of the wave function with
respect to particle exchange of fermions, and (ii) a correction factor to accurately capture
the effects of electron correlation.  Therefore, Pairing-Net introduces two independent
neural  network  architectures,  a  “neural  pair  product  (NPP)  state”  and  a  “neural
correlation factor (NCF),” to address these two requirements.
      The NPP state is a neural network representation of the pair-product (PP) state [6].
PP states are known to be more effective than those based on Slater determinants [26, 27]
for electron and spin systems (Appendix G also proposes a transferable NQS using Slater
determinants).  Intuitively, the PP state represents a product state of electron pairs
(referred to as geminals in quantum chemistry) and has the flexible expressive ability to
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                11

















                  Figure 2.  Pairing-Net architecture.  The input to the network is generated from a
                  single sampled configuration, and the output is the wave function amplitude Ψθk,φk(x),
                  parameterized by neural networksθk andφk.  Pairing-Net decomposes the wave function
                  into two neural networks:  A neural pair-product (NPP) wave function Ψ(NPP)θk      (x) and a
                  neural correlation factor (NCF) Cφk(x).  The input to the NPP wave function consists
                  of the informationξi for each sampled configurationx, the informationδξij for electron
                  pairs, and the electron correlation parametersλk characterizing the system.  The input
                  to the NCF is a sampled configuration of all electronsv.


describe, for instance, the mean-field approximation for superconductivity.  The NPP
state employs a neural network architecture that endows the PP state with enhanced
generalization capabilities concerning the information of electron pairs.
      The  input  to  the  neural  pairing  function fθk  of  the  NPP  state  comprises  the
spatial  coordinates  and  spin  information ξi   =   (ri,σi)  for  each  electron  at  each
basis,  the relative spatial coordinates and spin information for electron pairs δξij  =
(ri−rj,|ri−rj|,σi−σj,|σi−σj|).  The input dimension offθk is thus fixed, independent
of the value ofλk, enabling transfer learningF(λk−1→λk).  The NPP state is then
expressed as follows:
                                            "X                          #Nk/2
                             |Ψ(NPP)θk ⟩ =         fθk(ξi,δξij)ˆc†ξiˆc†ξj       |0⟩,                             (10)
                                               i,j
where|0⟩ represents the vacuum state, corresponding to the absence of particles.  This
NPP state is capable of learning the knowledge concerning electron pairing in the system.
The learnedfθk−1 can then be transferred to different parametersλk through fine-tuning
F(λk−1→λk).
      On the other hand, while several NQS architectures similar to the NPP state have
been proposed, they are not designed for systems exhibiting complex many-body effects
such as those found in the Hubbard model [12, 11].  Therefore, to represent strongly
correlated electron systems, architectural improvements are necessary to more accurately
capture the effects of electron correlation.
      To accurately capture electron correlation effects, we introduce a neural correlation
factor (NCF). Conventionally, empirical correction factors, such as Jastrow factors [28],
have  been  employed  to  accurately  capture  electron  correlation  effects  controlled  by
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                12

λk.    Recently,  it  has  been  shown  that  representing  these  correlation  factors  with
neural networks is effective even for strongly correlated electron systems [6].  The NCF
Cφk: R2M→ R takes as input the real-space electron configuration vectorv∈ R2M  for
each sampled configurationx. Since this incorporates all real-space electron configurations
as input, it can capture the complex entanglement that can arise in strongly correlated
electron systems.  For Hubbard models with the same lattice size, the input structure
remains unchanged, resulting in a transferable neural network architecture across all
electron correlation regimes.
     Therefore, Pairing-Net represents the trial wave function as the product of the NPP
wave function Ψ(NPP)θk     (x)≡⟨x|Ψ(NPP)θk ⟩ (For details on this calculation, see Appendix C)
and the NCF:
                               Ψθk,φk(x) = Ψ(NPP)θk     (x)× exp [Cφk(x)].                                 (11)
Pairing-Net rigorously satisfies the antisymmetry requirement for fermions and constitutes
NQS applicable to strongly correlated electron systems.  Utilizing Pairing-Net enables
efficient knowledge transfer to different systems via fine-tuningF(λk−1→λk).

Limitations:    This  study  primarily  focuses  on  benchmarking  the  effectiveness  of
curriculum learning, and thus employs a simple MLP as the neural network in Pairing-Net
throughout this work (although various architectures can be employed here).  From a
computational accuracy perspective, using a more sophisticated neural network would be
preferable.  This suggests the potential for improving computational accuracy by using
more advanced architectures (we experimentally confirm the effectiveness of our method
even with different architectures in Appendix G and Appendix I). For example, employing
a Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture, which achieves state-of-the-art computational
accuracy  for  frustrated  spin  systems  [29,  30],  for  the  NCF  is  highly  promising  for
greater accuracy.  In addition, another method that can be seamlessly integrated into
this architecture is the neural backflow approach [31].  In order to accurately capture
the  more  intricate  electron  correlations  in  strongly  correlated  electron  systems,  the
integration of these techniques is promising.  Furthermore, modifying the architecture
readily allows extension to more challenging models, such as the multiorbital Hubbard
model (see Appendix A), and various lattice geometries, making our method applicable
to a diverse range of quantum many-body systems.

7.  Experimental Results

This  section  presents  several  numerical  experiments  demonstrating  the  effectiveness
of  our  method,  including  benchmark  evaluations  and  practical  applications  for  two-
dimensional Hubbard models on a square lattice with periodic boundary conditions.
First, we demonstrate that transfer learning using Pairing-Net improves computational
efficiency and stability.  Next, we demonstrate that the curriculum learning facilitates
the acquisition of generalization capabilities concerning electron correlation.  We further
demonstrate that the curriculum learning enables efficient and stable exploration of
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                13


                  Table 1.  Transfer learning results for M  = 2× 2 from  ˜U1  to  ˜U2  using Pairing-Net.
                 The table shows the mean and standard deviation (std.)  of the number of epochs
                  to convergence, as well as the convergence count.  The convergence count indicates
                  the number of independent VMC runs (from a total of 1,000 trials) that satisfied the
                  convergence criterion (∆E < 10−4) within 500 epochs.
                               ˜U1       ˜U2    Mean± Std.    Conv.  Count

                             N/A    2.0            61± 95                     19
                             4.0      2.0         2.0± 0.0                 1000
                             6.0      2.0         4.0± 0.0                 1000
                             8.0      2.0         5.0± 0.0                 1000
                             N/A    4.0            82± 26                     70
                             2.0      4.0         2.0± 0.0                 1000
                             6.0      4.0         2.0± 0.0                 1000
                             8.0      4.0         3.0± 0.0                 1000


diverse electron correlation regimes.  The detailed experimental settings for this section
are provided in Appendix D.
     For the M = 2× 2 Hubbard model, we can use the ground-state energy obtained
from exact diagonalization,EED, as the ground truthEg, and employ the relative error in
the energy expectation value of the trained NQS, ∆E≡ (Eθk,φk−Eg)/|Eg|, as a metric
for convergence.  In the case of M = 4× 4, we instead adopt the average ground-state
energy, EQMC calculated using auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo (AF-QMC) [19].
     Furthermore, in the case ofM = 2× 2, the number of bases withNB = 70, all states
are used directly in optimizing Eq. (3).  Conversely, for M = 4× 4, the number of bases
at half-filling is NB∼ 1014, clearly necessitating the use of MCMC in Eq. (4).

7.1.  Evaluation of Transfer Learning

Here, we present benchmark results demonstrating that transfer learning with Pairing-
Net significantly improves both computational efficiency and stability.  Here, we present
benchmark results demonstrating that transfer learning with Pairing-Net significantly
improves both computational efficiency and stability compared to the conventional VMC
approach that does not employ transfer learning.
     Table 1 presents benchmark results for M = 2× 2 demonstrating transfer learning
with  Pairing-Net.    Results  where  pre-training  is  listed  as  N/A  correspond  to  the
conventional approach using random initialization.  For each transfer learning instance,
we performed 1000 independent VMC calculations, and the table shows the mean and
standard deviation (std.)  of the number of epochs required for convergence.  Here we
define convergence as ∆E < 1.0× 10−4 (see Appendix F for the impact of pre-trained
NQS accuracy on transfer learning).  The convergence count, defined as the number of
independent VMC calculations (out of 1,000 trials) that achieved ∆E < 10−4 within a
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                14


















                 Figure 3.  The loss curves forM = 4×4 over 100 epochs applied to ( ˜N2, ˜U2) = (16/16, 4)
                 using the various pre-trained NQS.


maximum of 500 epochs, is also shown.  The mean number of epochs to convergence
serves as a metric for efficiency, while the std.  of the number of epochs to convergence
and the convergence count are used as metrics for stability.  The results demonstrate
that  transfer  learning  achieves  significant  computational  speedups  compared  to  the
conventional approach.  For instance, transfer learning from  ˜U1 = 2.0 to  ˜U2 = 4.0 shows
approximately a 40-fold speedup compared to the conventional approach.  Furthermore,
the results for the std.  in the number of epochs to convergence and the convergence rate
demonstrate that transfer learning significantly improves the stability of the computation
across all regimes.  While the conventional approach exhibits large std.  in the number of
epochs to convergence, all instances using pre-trained NQS show zero std.  Moreover,
the conventional approach with  ˜U2 = 2.0 exhibits a very low convergence rate of 1.9%,
indicating significant instability, whereas transfer learning achieves 100% convergence.
      Next,  we present benchmark results for the M  =  4× 4 square-lattice Hubbard
model.  While existing multi-task learning methods [9] that do not rely on MCMC are
impractical for this scale of the Hubbard model due to computational cost and instability
issues, we demonstrate the scalability and effectiveness of our approach below.
      Fig. 3 presents the results of transfer learning for M  = 4× 4 with λk = ( ˜Nk, ˜Uk).
First, considering the results for  ˜Uk, significant efficiency improvements are observed
compared to the conventional approach.  For instance, when using a pre-trained NQS
with  ˜U1 = 2.0, it requires 301 epochs to reach an initial value of ∆E(0) = 8.3× 10−2
(see Table E2 in Appendix E.2) with the conventional approach (see Appendix E.3 for
details on stability with MCMC). Next, examining the results for the electron density
 ˜Nk,  although  the  improvements  are  less  pronounced  than  those  for  ˜Uk,  substantial
acceleration is still achieved.  Even more surprisingly, we observe a tendency for higher
accuracy when transfer learning is applied to the electron density (the trend was also
confirmed for the larger M = 6× 6; see Appendix H).
      Although it is non-trivial whether the perturbative intuition-based rule in Eq. (9)
holds in typical non-perturbative regions, including strong coupling regimes ( ˜U ≳ 6),
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                15






















                  Figure 4.  The dependence of ∆E(0), acquired through pre-training, on changes in the
                  target parameter  ˜U2.  Pre-trained NQS with  ˜U1 = 2, 4, 6, 8 were used.


remarkably, these results strongly suggest that the rule remains valid in such scenarios.
This  robustness  can  be  attributed  to  the  non-perturbative,  VMC-based  fine-tuning
approach; notably, we show that the computational efficiency is maintained even when
crossing a phase boundary in Appendix I. Furthermore, it is important to note that our
VMC-based method is not directly hampered by the fermionic sign problem, making it
applicable to a broader range of electron densities compared to the AF-QMC method.
These results demonstrate that even for large-scale systems requiring MCMC, our method
remains effective with high stability.

7.2.  Generalization of Electron Correlations

Here,  we  present  benchmark  results  on  the  generalization  performance  of  electron
correlation  effects  acquired  through  pre-training  with  Pairing-Net.    Based  on  the
theoretical analysis in Section 5.2, we utilize the accuracy of the first-order perturbed
energy, Eθ(0)
             2 ,φ(0)2  , as a metric for generalization performance.  In our experiments, the
generalization performance of the pre-trained NQS is evaluated using the relative error
∆E(0)≡ (Eθ(0)
               2 ,φ(0)2 −Eg)/|Eg|.  Here, ∆E(0) directly represents the accuracy of the first-
order perturbation energy approximation; thus, lower values of ∆E(0) indicate higher
generalization performance.
      Fig.  4  shows  how  the  generalization  performance  acquired  during  pre-training
behaves as a function of the parameter change, ν2 =  ˜U2−  ˜U1.  Across all pre-trained
NQS, higher generalization performance (∆E(0)) is consistently observed.  This trend,
specifically the observed behavior in fine-tuning with small parameter changes, has also
been empirically observed in the J1-J2 Heisenberg model, a prototypical frustrated spin
system [13].  The results support the theoretical analysis in Section 5.3, indicating that
curriculum learning with incrementally increasing, small ν2 values facilitates learning
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                16


                 Table 2.  Results for several curricula applied to the task set with  ˜Uk = 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, 8.0,
                 starting  from  ˜U1  =  2.0.   The  total  number  of  epochs  for M  =  2× 2  and  4× 4  to
                 convergence is shown.
                                     Curriculum    2× 2    4× 4
                                     N/A                 246      792
                                     Random                11        45
                                     Ours                   7          3


that leverages both high generalization performance and optimization stability.

7.3.  Explorative Curriculum Learning

Here  we  examine  the  total  number  of  epochs  required  for  transfer  learning  during
curriculum  learning.   In  this  experiment,  we  consider  a  challenging  task  set  ˜Uk  =
2.0, 4.0, 6.0, 8.0, frequently adopted to investigate intriguing behaviors of the Hubbard
model [19, 6, 14, 15].  Such task sets correspond, for example, to analyzing various crystal
structure deformation patterns in real materials [14, 15].  Table 2 presents the total
number of epochs excluding pre-training for the conventional approach (no curriculum
learning, indicated as N/A) and for several curricula; see Appendix E.4 for the details
of the results.  The efficiency improvement is greater for the larger M = 4× 4 system
compared to M  = 2× 2, suggesting that the curriculum following our proposed rule
becomes increasingly advantageous for larger system sizes.  For the case of M = 4× 4,
our curriculum achieves up to a 15-fold speedup compared to a random curriculum and
an over 200-fold speedup compared to the conventional approach.  While this analysis is
limited to only four tasks, we anticipate even greater efficiency gains with our method as
the search space expands.

8.  Conclusions

In this study, we propose a novel curriculum learning framework for the efficient and
stable exploration of a broad parameter space in quantum many-body systems.  The
framework  introduces  transfer  learning  for  NQS  and  subsequently  proposes  a  novel
curriculum learning algorithm based on iterative transfer learning.  By recognizing the
interpretability of this transfer learning process through the lens of perturbation theory,
we provide guidelines for curriculum design in quantum many-body systems. Furthermore,
we introduce Pairing-Net, a transferable NQS architecture designed for the practical
application of this curriculum learning approach to strongly correlated electron systems,
and demonstrate its effectiveness through numerical experiments.  These experiments
show a speedup of approximately 200-fold or more compared to existing approaches,
along with a significant improvement in computational stability.  These findings suggest
that our proposed method has the potential to significantly mitigate the computational
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                17

cost and instability issues inherent in existing methods.

Reproducibility

The implementation code used to generate all results in this paper is available from the
authors upon reasonable request.

Acknowledgments

This  study  was  supported  by  JST  CREST  Grant  Number  JPMJCR1913  and  JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number JP22H00516, JP22H05106 (Y.K.), and JP25K15230 (T.K.).

Data availability statement

No new datasets were generated or analyzed in the course of this study.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                18

Appendix A. Hubbard Model

In this section, we introduce the intuitive physical significance of the Hubbard model.
Furthermore, we explain the multiorbital Hubbard model, which becomes essential when
quantitatively considering real materials, and demonstrate that its parameter space is
significantly larger compared to that of the single-orbital model in Eq. (2).
     The Hubbard model has been extensively studied as a theoretical framework for
understanding magnetic and superconducting materials.  In this model, the electronic
states in a crystalline solid are described by considering only two main effects:  TheP
kinetic  term  denoted  as   ˆHKin ≡ −tP⟨i,j⟩                σ  ˆc†iσˆcjσ + H.c.  ,  and  the  interaction
term,  representing  the  repulsive  Coulomb  interaction  between  electrons  denoted  as
ˆHint≡UPNi=1 ˆni↑ˆni↓.  These effects are illustrated in Fig. A1.
     Although the Hubbard model is a highly simplified model, it has been shown to
exhibit a wide range of physical phenomena, such as magnetism and superconductivity,
making it an intriguing and widely studied model [32].  These phenomena are believed to
arise from electron correlations, which also present significant challenges in understanding
the model.  The balance between kinetic and interaction terms governs electron behavior:
the kinetic term enhances itinerancy, while the interaction term induces localization.  The
degree of electron correlation is determined by parameters such as the electron density
˜N  and the ratio  ˜U =U/t.  Depending on these values, the system can exhibit metallic,
insulating, or even superconducting behavior, as suggested by numerous studies [2, 3, 1].
Thus, exhaustively exploring quantum states across various parameter setsλ = ( ˜N, ˜U)
is crucial for analyzing these phenomena.
     Moreover, accurately modeling realistic materials requires extending the Hubbard
model  to  incorporate  multiorbital  effects  to  capture  the  essential  physics,  e.g.,  iron-
based and unconventional cuprate superconductors [33, 34].  The effective Hamiltonian
of the multiorbital Hubbard model can also be divided into the kinetic term,  ˆH(MO)Kin   ,
describing electron hopping, and the interaction term,  ˆH(MO)int    , describing electron-electron
interactions.  These terms can be expressed as follows:
                       ˆH(MO)          X    X
                         Kin    =X              (tζηij ˆc†iζσˆcjησ + H.c.) +X   ϵζˆniζσ,                    (A.1)
                                  ⟨i,j⟩ ζ,η  σ                             i,ζ,σ
                       ˆH(MO)             ˆniζ↑ˆniζ↓ +U′X      X    ˆniζσˆniητ
                         int     =UX
                                      i,ζ                 i,ζ,η σ.τ
                                            X
                                  −JX            ˆc†iζσˆciζτ ˆc†iητ ˆciησ
                                       i,ζ,η σ,τ
                                  +J′X       ˆc†iζ↑ˆc†iζ↓ˆciη↓ˆciη↑,                                                  (A.2)
                                        i,ζ̸=η

where ˆc†iζσ  (ˆciζσ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron with spin σ in
the ζ  orbital at site i.  Additionally, tζηij ∈ R represents the electron hopping from the
η  orbital at site j  to the ζ  orbital at site i, ϵζ∈ R denotes the energy level of the ζ
orbital, and ˆniζσ≡ ˆc†iζσˆciζσ.  Here, H.c.  denotes the Hermitian conjugate of the preceding
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                19























                  Figure A1.  Schematic representation of the two-dimensional square lattice Hubbard
                  model.   The  arrows  indicate  electrons  on  the  lattice  with  spin-up  or  spin-down. t
                  denotes the electron hopping between nearest-neighbor lattice sites, and U  represents
                  the on-site Coulomb repulsion.


term, tηζji ˆc†jησˆciζσ.  In the case of a multiorbital system, U∈ R represents the on-site
Coulomb interaction within the same orbital, U′∈ R represents the inter-orbital on-site
Coulomb interaction, J∈ R represents the Hund’s coupling,  and J′∈ R represents
the  pair  hopping.   As  such,  multiorbital  systems  possess  a  richer  set  of  parameters,
λ(MO)  =  ( ˜N,tζηij,ϵζ,U,U′,J,J′),  compared  to  the  single-orbital  case, λ  =  ( ˜N, ˜U).
Consequently,  the  search  space  is  significantly  larger  than  in  the  single-orbital  case,
making efficient exploration crucial.  Our proposed method can be readily extended to
multiorbital systems, suggesting its capability to efficiently explore the aforementioned
vast parameter space.

Appendix B. Perturbation Theory

We introduce perturbation theory, a frequently used approximation method in quantum
mechanics.   Perturbation  theory  solves  for  physical  quantities  and  quantum  states
by expressing them as a series expansion in terms of the solution of a solvable system
(unperturbed system), when the system of interest is composed of this unperturbed system
and a small contribution from a perturbation.  Perturbation theory is also employed
in methods to improve the accuracy of the solution by refining the series expansion,
and  in  approximation  techniques  that  extract  and  sum  the  dominant  contributions
(often calculated using Feynman diagrams, hence referred to as diagrammatic methods,
e.g., random phase approximation [35] and fluctuation-exchange approximation [36]).
In what follows, we introduce the Rayleigh-Schr¨odinger perturbation expansion (time-
independent), the most fundamental type of perturbation theory.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                20

      We consider a Hamiltonian  ˆHk given by:
                                               ˆHk =  ˆHk−1 + ˆVk,                                               (B.1)

where  ˆHk−1  is  the  unperturbed  Hamiltonian  and  ˆVk  is  the  perturbation  term,  both
assumed to be time-independent.  Let us assume that the normalized complete set of
eigenstates|Ψk−1,n⟩ of the unperturbed part  ˆHk−1 is obtained as follows:
                                      ˆHk−1|Ψk−1,n⟩ =Ek−1,n|Ψk−1,n⟩,                                    (B.2)
                                     ⟨Ψk−1,n|Ψk−1,m⟩ =δnm,                                                (B.3)

where|Ψk−1,n⟩ denotes then-th eigenstate of  ˆHk−1, corresponding to the energy eigenvalue
Ek−1,n.  We consider the eigenstate|Ψk−1,n⟩ without energy degeneracy among these
states.
      Our goal is to solve the following eigenvalue equation:
                                           ˆHk|Ψk,n⟩ =Ek,n|Ψk,n⟩.                                           (B.4)

In the following, we derive the first-order correction term for the energy eigenvalues.
      The first-order analysis of the eigenvalues relies on the zeroth-order approximation
of the corresponding eigenstates,

                                              |Ψk,n⟩≈|Ψk−1,n⟩.                                               (B.5)

Using  this  approximation,   the  energy  eigenvalue Ek,n   = ⟨Ψk,n| ˆHk|Ψk,n⟩  can  be
approximated as follows:

                                        Ek,n≈Ek−1,n +E(1)k,n,                                                (B.6)
                                        E(1)k,n =⟨Ψk−1,n| ˆVk|Ψk−1,n⟩.                                        (B.7)

This  represents  the  first-order  result  of  perturbation  theory  for  the  energy  levels.
Considering the ground-state energy for n = 0, this expression is found to be identical in
form to the energy correction term for zero-shot prediction in Eq. (8). While the first-order
perturbation energy provides a sufficient approximation in simple cases, such as applying
an  external  electric  field  to  a  hydrogen  atom,  calculating  higher-order  perturbation
terms (second-order and above) often becomes necessary for complex systems.  However,
obtaining analytical solutions for these higher-order terms is challenging, necessitating
numerical  computation.   Our  fine-tuning  method  can  be  viewed  as  a  technique  for
obtaining these higher-order terms.

Appendix C. The NPP wave function with Pfaffian

The NPP wave function for a sampled real space configuration x is expressed using the
neural pairing function fθk(ξi,δξij) that incorporates information about electron pairs ,
as follows:
                                            Ψ(NPP)θk     (x) = Pf[Xθk].                                            (C.1)
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                21


                  Table C1.  Hyperparameters in our experiments for the Hubbard models.
                System size                    M = 2× 2         M = 2× 2        M = 4× 4         M = 6× 6
            NQS architecture                   Pairing-Net        SD-Net        Pairing-Net      Pairing-Net
  Number of layers (NPP)                                   1                   1                    1                    1
  Hidden size (NPP)                                       50                 50                   50                 100
  Number of layers (NCF)                                   1                   1                    1                    2
  Hidden size (NCF)                                     100               100                 100                 400
  Number of variational parameters                     1452             1452               3852             59502
  Number of epochs in pre-training                     1000             1000               1000               1000
  Number of MC samples                                      -                   -               1024               1024
  Number of independent MCs                                 -                   -                    8                    8
  Length of Markov chain                                    -                   -               4736               4736


Here,  a  skew-symmetric  matrix Xθk ∈  CNk×Nk  is  defined  as Xθk   = Fθk− F Tθk,
where Fθk∈ CNk×Nk  is the matrix representation of the neural pairing function with
(Fθk)ij  = fθk(ξi,δξij).  Pf  denotes the Pfaffian,  which is defined for a 2L× 2L skew-
symmetric matrix A as follows:
                                                X               LY
                             Pf[A] =    12LL!         sgn(σ)        Aσ(2i−1),σ(2i),                            (C.2)
                                               σ∈S2L           i=1

where S2L  denotes the symmetric group of order 2L.  In the case where the number
of electrons is odd, the above formulation can be applied by considering the unpaired
single-particle orbital [11, 12].

Appendix D. Experimental Setup

Here, we provided the detailed settings for each experiment conducted in Section 7 and
subsequent Appendices.  First, the implementation of Pairing-Net, SD-Net in Appendix
G, and ViT wave function in Appendix I utilized NetKet [37], a powerful open-source
library for quantum many-body problems.  This study utilized a single NVIDIA H100
PCIe GPU with 81, 559 MiB of total memory.
      The architectures of the neural networks for the NPP wave function, NSD wave
function, and NCF all employed multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), with the hyperbolic
tangent function used as the activation function in all cases.  All networks in Pairing-Net
and SD-Net were implemented with purely real-valued parameters;  in our code,  the
NPP/NSD wave-function modules returned a two-component output— the real and the
imaginary part of the wave function.  Optimization was performed using the stochastic
reconfiguration (SR) method and a Metropolis-Hastings sampler implemented in NetKet,
and random initialization was employed for cases without fine-tuning.  The learning rate
was scheduled to decrease from 0.05 to 0.01.  The hyperparameters and computation
times for the experiments are summarized in Table C1 and D1, respectively.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                22

     Furthermore, the ViT wave function implementation used in Appendix I was adopted
from the repository at https://zenodo.org/records/14060431 [38] and the ViT wave
function section of the NetKet tutorial documentation (https://netket.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/index.html).  The ViT wave function employed Factored Multi-Head
Attention [38] with 10 attention heads, 4 encoder layers, an embedding dimension of 60,
and a patch size of 2× 2, resulting in a total of 154,980 parameters.


                 Table D1.  Computation times for 1000 epochs.
                          Model      M            NQS               time (GPU hours)
                        Hubbard          2× 2    Pairing-Net                 2.7× 10−3
                        Hubbard          2× 2       SD-Net                   2.6× 10−3
                        Hubbard          4× 4    Pairing-Net                          9.4
                        Hubbard          6× 6    Pairing-Net                          46
                   J1-J2 Heisenberg    6× 6          ViT                     4.3× 10−1



Appendix E. Detailed Results for Transfer Learning

Here, we summarize various numerical experiment results for the M = 2× 2 and 4× 4
Hubbard models in Section 7.1.  The computational conditions are the same as those
employed in Section 7.1.  Furthermore, as described in Section 7, the threshold used
to define convergence is based on the order of computational accuracy achievable after
100 epochs with the conventional approach; specifically, 10−4 for the 2×2 case and 10−1
for the 4× 4 case.  The results obtained here were utilized in the curriculum learning
analysis presented in Section 7.3.

Appendix E.1.  Results of M = 2× 2

Table E1 details the transfer learning results for the M  = 2× 2 case.  Results where
pre-training is listed as N/A represent the conventional approach.  Convergence is defined
as ∆E < 1.0× 10−4.  The table shows the mean and standard deviation (std.)  of the
number of epochs to convergence, and the convergence rate, based on 1000 independent
trials.  A hyphen (-) indicates failure to converge.
     First, the upper table in Table E1 presents the results for  ˜U2 = 6.0 and 8.0, which
were not covered in Section 7.1.  These results are consistent with the theoretical analysis
in Section 5.3.  As in the results of Section 7.1, they demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method for the M  = 2× 2 Hubbard model in terms of both computational efficiency
and stability.
     Next,  the  lower  table  in  Table  E1  presents  the  results  of  transfer  learning  for
M  =  2× 2  focusing  on  changes  in   ˜Nk.   As  shown,  the  convergence  speed  is  slower
compared to the results for  ˜Uk.  This can be attributed to the significant finite-size effects
in small-scale systems such as M = 2× 2, which limit the ability to make small changes
in electron density.  Here, the finite-size effect refers to the fact that the relative change in
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                23


                    Table E1.  Transfer learning results for M  = 2× 2 under various conditions using
                    Pairing-Net.  The upper panel shows the results of transfer learning with fixed  ˜N  and
                    varying  ˜Uk, while the lower panel shows the results with fixed  ˜U  and varying  ˜Nk.
                              ˜N       ˜U1       ˜U2        Mean± Std.       Conv.  Count

                            1.0    N/A    6.0                    83± 15                   293
                            1.0    2.0       6.0               3.0± 0.0                 1000
                            1.0    4.0       6.0               2.0± 0.0                 1000
                            1.0    8.0       6.0               2.0± 0.0                 1000
                            1.0    N/A    8.0                    81± 13                   415
                            1.0    2.0       8.0               5.0± 0.0                 1000
                            1.0    4.0       8.0               4.0± 0.0                 1000
                            1.0    6.0       8.0               3.0± 0.0                 1000

                              ˜U        ˜N1       ˜N2        Mean± Std.       Conv.  Count

                            2.0    N/A    0.5                    48± 22                   365
                            2.0    1.0       0.5                          -                       0
                            2.0    N/A    1.0                    61± 95                     19
                            2.0    0.5       1.0     (1.5± 0.0)× 102                 1000
                            4.0    N/A    0.5                    49± 22                   333
                            4.0    1.0       0.5                          -                       0
                            4.0    N/A    1.0                    82± 26                     70
                            4.0    0.5       1.0     (1.6± 0.0)× 102                 1000
                            6.0    N/A    0.5                    50± 21                   317
                            6.0    1.0       0.5                10± 0.0                 1000
                            6.0    N/A    1.0                    83± 15                   293
                            6.0    0.5       1.0                53± 0.0                 1000
                            8.0    N/A    0.5                    52± 21                   304
                            8.0    1.0       0.5                43± 0.0                 1000
                            8.0    N/A    1.0                    81± 13                   415
                            8.0    0.5       1.0                60± 0.0                 1000


electron number,|N2−N1|, becomes significantly larger in small-scale systems compared
to large-scale systems with respect to the lattice size M.  These results are consistent
with the theoretical analysis in Section 5.3.  Indeed, as observed in the results for the
M = 4× 4 and M = 6× 6 cases (Section 7.1 and Appendix H, respectively), for a given
change in the number of electrons, the convergence speed tends to increase with system
size compared to the results presented in this section.

Appendix E.2.  Results of M = 4× 4

Here we show the results for theM = 4×4 case presented in Sec. 7.1. Table E2 summarizes
the transfer learning results for the M = 4× 4.  Results where pre-training is listed as
N/A represent the conventional approach.  Convergence is defined as ∆E < 1.0× 10−1.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                24


                    Table E2.  Transfer learning results for M  = 4× 4.  The first section shows results
                    for transfer learning from  ˜U1 to  ˜U2 with a fixed  ˜N = 1.0 using Pairing-Net, while the
                    second section presents results under a fixed  ˜U  = 4.0 in electron density.  The table
                    shows the number of epochs to convergence, and ∆E(0).  Additionally, the rightmost
                    column N(0)E    indicates the number of epochs required for convergence to the initial
                    value ∆E(0) using the conventional approach.
                                ˜U1        ˜U2         ∆E(0)       Conv.  Epochs  N (0)E

                              N/A     2.0                  1.1                       50    N/A
                              4.0        2.0     5.0× 10−2                         0      143
                              6.0        2.0     1.5× 10−1                         1        37
                              8.0        2.0     2.7× 10−1                         2        19
                              2.0        4.0     8.3× 10−2                         0      301
                              N/A     4.0                  2.0                     188    N/A
                              6.0        4.0     7.7× 10−2                         0      337
                              8.0        4.0     1.8× 10−1                         1        68
                              2.0        6.0     3.2× 10−1                         4        49
                              4.0        6.0     1.1× 10−1                         1      244
                              N/A     6.0                  2.8                     258    N/A
                              8.0        6.0     8.8× 10−2                         0      261
                              2.0        8.0     7.8× 10−1                       41        19
                              4.0        8.0     3.4× 10−1                         6      189
                              6.0        8.0     1.2× 10−1                         2      309
                              N/A     8.0                  5.1                     346    N/A

                                ˜N1        ˜N2         ∆E(0)       Conv.  Epochs

                              N/A     1.00                 2.0                     188    N/A
                              0.875    1.00      2.7× 10−1                       10        44
                              0.750    1.00      5.0× 10−1                       14        17
                              0.625    1.00      5.3× 10−1                       27        16


      First, Table E2, upper panel, summarizes the number of epochs to convergence
and the initial values for transfer learning with respect to electron density  ˜N.  These
results demonstrate that high generalization performance (accuracy of the first-order
perturbation approximation) is achieved even with varying electron density, indicating
the effectiveness of transfer learning.
      Furthermore, the bottom panel of Table E2 presents the results of transfer learning
with respect to  ˜Uk.  These results show that greater efficiency gains are achieved compared
to the M = 2× 2 case, suggesting that our method is more effective for larger systems.

Appendix E.3.  Stability of Transfer Learning with MCMC
Finally, we show the results on the stability of transfer learning when using MCMC
with the M = 4× 4 Hubbard model.  Compared to the M = 2× 2 case with full bases,
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                25


















                  Figure E1.  Loss curves for targeting  ˜U2 = 2.  Results obtained using a pre-trained
                  NQS with  ˜U1 = 4, 6, and 8 are compared to the conventional approach.  The figure also
                  shows the mean and standard deviation ofEθk,φk obtained from independent five VMC
                  calculations for each case.


optimization becomes less stable when employing MCMC. Therefore, we numerically
evaluate the extent to which our method is affected by this instability.
      Fig. E1 presents the stability evaluation results obtained using several pre-trained
NQS  ˜U1 = 4.0, 6.0, 8.0, with  ˜U2 = 2.0 as the target parameter set.  For each pre-trained
NQS, five trials were conducted.  These results demonstrate that optimization stability is
largely maintained across almost all transfer learning instances.  These findings suggest
that our method exhibits high stability even in large-scale systems employing MCMC
sampling.
























                  Figure E2.  Comparison of the best and a randomly selected poor curriculum for a)
                  M = 2× 2 and b)M = 4× 4 Hubbard models.  The number of epochs for each transfer
                  learning step is indicated; arrows show the transfer direction ( ˜U1 = 2.0 starting point).
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                26


































                  Figure E3.  The dependence of generalization performance, ∆E(0), on the accuracy,
                  ∆E( ˜U1), of each pre-trained NQS. Evaluations were conducted using various pairings
                  of pre-training  ˜U1 values and target  ˜U2 values within the transfer.  Panels a), b), c),
                  and d) correspond to pre-training  ˜U1 values of 2, 4, 6, and 8, respectively.


Appendix E.4.  Results of Explorative Curriculum Learning

This section presents results from several curriculum learning schemes, leveraging the
transfer learning results described above.  We confirm that the curriculum proposed in
Section 5.3 exhibits the highest efficiency among all curricula considered.
      Fig. E2 presents the results of curriculum learning for theM = 2× 2 andM = 4× 4
Hubbard models, showing the number of epochs required for transfer learning.  These
results confirm that the curriculum following the rules outlined in Section 5.3 is more
efficient than any random curriculum.  Furthermore, given that transfer learning with
large parameter changes is less efficient in larger systems compared to smaller ones (e.g.,
Transfer learning from  ˜U1 = 2 to  ˜U2 = 8 requires 5 epochs for M = 2× 2 and 41 epochs
for M = 4× 4, despite the looser convergence criterion for M = 4× 4), our proposed
rules are suggested to play a crucial role in enhancing efficiency for large-scale systems.
We note that although K is limited to 4 in this study, theoretical analysis in Section 5.3
and our results suggest that our method becomes more effective as K increases.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                27

Appendix F. Accuracy of the Pre-Trained NQS

Here,  we  investigate  the  effect  of  pre-trained  NQS  accuracy  on  the  generalization
performance  of  transfer  learning.   In  Section  7.1,  the  relative  error  of  the  NQS  pre-
trained  with  ˜U1  is  approximately  1.0× 10−4  or  less.   However,  depending  on  the
accuracy of this ∆E, the generalization performance might not be sufficiently acquired,
potentially hindering the effectiveness of transfer learning.  To address this, we evaluate
the  generalization  performance,  ∆E(0),  of  pre-trained  models  with  varying  levels  of
accuracy (∆E( ˜U1)), thereby determining the required accuracy of the pre-trained NQS
to achieve adequate generalization.
      Fig. E3 illustrates the relationship between the accuracy of the pre-trained NQS
and its generalization performance.  The results indicate that, across all regimes, the
generalization performance,  ∆E(0),  plateaus at approximately ∆E( ˜U1) < 1.0× 10−4
(this plateau represents the limitation of the accuracy of the first-order perturbation
approximation  when  the  exact  solution  of  the  ground  state  is  employed).    This
suggests that sufficient generalization is achieved when this level of accuracy is ensured.
Furthermore, the linear improvement in generalization performance even in the regime
where ∆E( ˜U1)> 1.0× 10−4 indicates that a degree of generalization is attainable even
when the pre-training is not fully completed.  This finding suggests that transfer learning
remains effective even in regimes with high system complexity and less-than-perfect
accuracy (this trend is also confirmed in Section 7.3 and Appendix E.2).

Appendix G. Transferable NQS with Slater Determinants

This section introduces SD-Net, a transferable NQS architecture distinct from the Pairing-
Net presented in Section 6.  We then demonstrate the architecture-agnostic effectiveness
of our method through several numerical experiments.
      Similar to Pairing-Net, SD-Net is a transferable NQS architecture for the Hubbard
model,  designed to facilitate the transfer of electron correlation information.  While
Pairing-Net utilizes the NPP wave function, SD-Net employs a neural Slater determinant
(NSD) wave function, which represents a Slater determinant using a neural network.
The  Slater  determinant  (SD)  inherently  satisfies  the  antisymmetry  requirement  for
fermions and is a widely used trial wave function for electron systems.  Numerous NQS
architectures based on SD have been proposed [26, 27, 8, 11, 12], and SD-Net represents
a variant of these.  Furthermore, we incorporate the NCF introduced in Section 6 into
the NSD wave function.
      The input to the NSD wave function is identical to that of the NPP wave function;
however, the output gθk(ξi,δξi) is interpreted as an electron orbital function.  Based on
this interpretation, the NSD wave function Ψ(NSD)θk     (x) is defined as follows:

                                         Ψ(NSD)θk     (x) = det[Gθk],                                            (G.1)

where (Gθk)ij≡gθk(ξi,δξij), and the NSD wave function is defined as the determinant
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                28


                   Table G1.  Transfer learning results from  ˜U1 to  ˜U2 with fixed electron density  ˜N = 1.0
                   using SD-Net (SDN) and Pairing-Net (PN). Results where pre-training is listed as
                   N/A represent the conventional approach.  Convergence is defined as ∆E < 1.0× 10−4.
                   The table shows the Mean and standard deviation (std.)  of the number of epochs to
                   convergence, and the convergence count (CC), based on 1000 independent trials.
           ˜U1       ˜U2    Mean± Std. (SDN)    Mean± Std. (PN)    CC (SDN)    CC (PN)

         N/A    2.0                    482± 220                     61± 95                 400               19
         4.0       2.0               4.00± 0.00               2.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         6.0       2.0               7.00± 0.00               4.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         8.0       2.0               24.0± 0.00               5.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         N/A    4.0                    320± 191                     82± 26                 702               70
         2.0       4.0               4.00± 0.00               2.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         6.0       4.0               4.00± 0.00               2.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         8.0       4.0               10.0± 0.00               3.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         N/A    6.0                    270± 183                     83± 15                 776             293
         2.0       6.0               14.0± 0.00               3.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         4.0       6.0               4.00± 0.00               2.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         8.0       6.0               6.00± 0.00               2.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         N/A    8.0                    264± 185                     81± 13                 771             415
         2.0       8.0               86.0± 0.00               5.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         4.0       8.0               47.0± 0.00               4.00± 0.00                  1000           1000
         6.0       8.0               6.00± 0.00               3.00± 0.00                  1000           1000


of this matrix.  In SD-Net, the trial wave function is expressed as:

                                   Ψθk,φk(x) = Ψ(NSD)θk     (x)× exp [Cφk(x)].                               (G.2)

The  following  section  presents  the  results  of  numerical  experiments  using  this  wave
function, analogous to those in Section 7.1.  The experimental setup in this section is
described in Appendix D.
      Table  G1  presents  the  results  of  transfer  learning  using  SD-Net.   These  results
demonstrate significant speedup and improved stability, mirroring the findings obtained
with Pairing-Net in Section 7.1.  This architecture-agnostic effectiveness of our proposed
method is further corroborated by these findings.
      Furthermore,  a  comparison with  the  results for  Pairing-Net  (Table 1)  reveals  a
slower  convergence  speed,  suggesting  that  the  NPP  wave  function  possesses  greater
expressiveness.  While SD-Net exhibits higher stability than Pairing-Net, we remark
that our method dramatically improves stability, ensuring sufficient stability even in
computations employing the more expressive Pairing-Net.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                29


















                  Figure H1.  The loss curves for M  = 6× 6 over 100 epochs applied to ( ˜N2, ˜U2) =
                 (36/36, 4) using the various pre-trained NQS.


Appendix H. Results of Larger-Scale Hubbard Models

This section presents the results of numerical experiments conducted on a largerM = 6×6
Hubbard  model.   Similar  to  the M  =  4× 4  case  in  Section  7.1,  we  investigate  the
effectiveness of transfer learning with Pairing-Net using several pre-trained NQS with
different  ˜U1 and  ˜N1 values.  Details of the experimental setup are provided in Appendix
D.
     Fig. H1 shows the loss curves for the M = 6× 6 case, comparing transfer learning
with the conventional approach.  Consistent with the findings in Section 7.1, these results
demonstrate efficiency gains from transfer learning, even in larger systems.  Moreover, as
predicted by the theoretical analysis in Section 5.3, transfer to similar parameter sets
shows the greatest effectiveness.  Notably, these results reveal that utilizing an electron
density of  ˜N1 = 34/36 achieves high accuracy within only a few tens of epochs.  This
contrasts with the findings in Section 7.1, particularly for the M = 2× 2 case, where
utilizing  pre-trained  NQS  with  ˜U1  proved  more  effective.   This  discrepancy  is  likely
attributable to finite-size effects related to electron density, as discussed in Appendix
E.1.  Specifically, this implies that the change in electron density can be smaller in larger
systems compared to smaller ones.  Moreover, despite the initial values being almost the
same as  ˜U1 = 2, 6, it was confirmed that transfer learning for electron density  ˜N1 = 34/36
converges faster.  This implies that the transfer of electron density captures more complex
electron correlations.  These observations suggest that our method, employing transfer
learning for electron density, is more effective for large-scale systems.

Appendix I. Results of J1-J2 Heisenberg Models

Here,  we  validate  the  applicability  of  our  method  to  another  challenging  quantum
many-body  system—namely,  the  frustrated,  strongly  correlated J1–J2  Heisenberg
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                30



















                 Figure I1.  The loss curves for M = 6× 6 J1-J2 Heisenberg model over 100 epochs
                 applied to λ2 = 0.40 using the various pre-trained NQS.


model—beyond the Hubbard-model setting.  Its effective Hamiltonian reads
                                 ˆH(λ) =J1    X    ˆSi·ˆSj +J2   X     ˆSi·ˆSj,                                 (I.1)


                                              ⟨i,j⟩             ⟨⟨i,j⟩⟩

where ˆSi is the spin- 12 operator on sitei,⟨i,j⟩ (⟨⟨i,j⟩⟩) denotes a nearest- (next-nearest-)
neighbor pair, andJ1 > 0 (J2 > 0) is the antiferromagnetic coupling on the corresponding
bond.  The parameter space of the J1-J2 Heisenberg model can therefore be spanned by
the ratio λ =J2/J1.
     Previous studies suggest that several quantum phase transitions occur upon varying
λ; continuous transitions have been reported at λ≈ 0.49 and 0.54 [39, 40].  Because the
change in the ground-state wave function under perturbations is inherently non-linear, it
is not obvious that the curriculum rule proposed in Sec. 5.3 will remain valid.  In this
section, we demonstrate that our fine-tuning procedure continues to perform reliably
even in the presence of these phase transitions.
     Figure I1 shows the results of transfer learning using the ViT wave function [29, 30]
for  the  two-dimensional J1-J2  Heisenberg  model  on  an M  =  6× 6  square  lattice
with J2/J1  =  0.40.   Here,  the  ground-truth  energy Eg  is  taken  from  the  RBM+PP
results [40].  These results show that every fine-tuning step follows the curriculum rule
proposed in Sec. 5.3 and that smaller parameter changes yield higher generalization
performance during zero-shot learning than the conventional approach.  In particular,
transfer learning remains effective even when the optimization crosses the critical coupling
ratioJ2/J1≈ 0.49.  These findings demonstrate the broad applicability of our curriculum
learning strategy to a wide class of challenging quantum many-body systems.
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                31

 [1]  Imada  M,  Fujimori  A  and  Tokura  Y  1998  Rev.  Mod.  Phys.  70(4)  1039–1263  URL  https:
       //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.70.1039
 [2]  Hirsch  J  E  1985  Phys.  Rev.  B  31(7)  4403–4419  URL  https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
        PhysRevB.31.4403
 [3]  Anderson P W 1997 The Theory of Superconductivity in the High-T”c” Cuprate Superconductors
       (Princeton University Press) URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1m323t3
 [4]  Hubbard J and Flowers B H 1963 Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical
       and Physical Sciences 276 238–257 URL https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.
        1098/rspa.1963.0204
 [5]  Carleo G and Troyer M 2017 Science 355 602–606 URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.
        1126/science.aag2302
 [6]  Nomura  Y,  Darmawan  A  S,  Yamaji  Y  and  Imada  M  2017  Phys.  Rev.  B  96(20)  205152  URL
        https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.205152
 [7]  Gao N and G¨unnemann S 2023  Proceedings  of  the  40th  International  Conference  on  Machine
       Learning  (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research  vol 202) ed Krause A, Brunskill E, Cho K,
        Engelhardt B, Sabato S and Scarlett J (PMLR) pp 10708–10726 URL https://proceedings.
        mlr.press/v202/gao23c.html
 [8]  Scherbela  M,  Gerard  L  and  Grohs  P  2023  Thirty-seventh  Conference  on  Neural  Information
       Processing Systems  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FBNyccPfAu
 [9]  Zhu  Z,  Mattheakis  M,  Pan  W  and  Kaxiras  E  2023  Phys.  Rev.  Res. 5(4)  043084  URL  https:
       //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.043084
[10]  Scherbela M, Gerard L and Grohs P 2024 Nature Communications 15 120 URL https://doi.
        org/10.1038/s41467-023-44216-9
[11]  Kim  J,  Pescia  G,  Fore  B,  Nys  J,  Carleo  G,  Gandolfi  S,  Hjorth-Jensen  M  and  Lovato  A  2024
       Communications Physics 7 148 URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-024-01613-w
[12]  Gao  N  and  G¨unnemann  S  2024  The  Thirty-eighth  Annual  Conference  on  Neural  Information
       Processing Systems  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HRkniCWM3E
[13]  Rende  R,  Goldt  S,  Becca  F  and  Viteritti  L  L  2024  Phys.  Rev.  Res. 6(4)  043280  URL  https:
       //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.6.043280
[14]  Sakakibara H and Kotani T 2019 Phys. Rev. B 99(19) 195141 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
        10.1103/PhysRevB.99.195141
[15]  Rut G, Fidrysiak M, Goc-Jag lo D and Rycerz A 2023 International Journal of Molecular Sciences
       24 URL https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/24/2/1509
[16]  Iimura S, Matsuishi S, Sato H, Hanna T, Muraba Y, Kim S W, Kim J E, Takata M and Hosono H
        2012 Nature communications 3 943 URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1913
[17]  Suzuki K, Usui H, Iimura S, Sato Y, Matsuishi S, Hosono H and Kuroki K 2014 Phys. Rev. Lett.
       113(2) 027002 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.027002
[18]  McMillan W L 1965 Phys. Rev. 138(2A) A442–A451 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
        PhysRev.138.A442
[19]  Qin M, Shi H and Zhang S 2016 Phys. Rev. B 94(8) 085103 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
        10.1103/PhysRevB.94.085103
[20]  Amari    S    i    1998    Neural   Computation   10    251–276    URL    https://doi.org/10.1162/
        089976698300017746
[21]  Sorella S 2001 Phys. Rev. B 64(2) 024512 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.
        64.024512
[22]Hastings W K 1970       Biometrika 57 97–109 URL https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/57.1.97
[23]  Wu D, Rossi R, Vicentini F, Astrakhantsev N, Becca F, Cao X, Carrasquilla J, Ferrari F, Georges
       A, Hibat-Allah M, Imada M, L¨auchli A M, Mazzola G, Mezzacapo A, Millis A, Moreno J R,
        Neupert T, Nomura Y, Nys J, Parcollet O, Pohle R, Romero I, Schmid M, Silvester J M, Sorella
        S, Tocchio L F, Wang L, White S R, Wietek A, Yang Q, Yang Y, Zhang S and Carleo G 2024
       Science 386 296–301 URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adg9774
Explorative Curriculum Learning for Strongly Correlated Electron Systems                32

[24]  Bengio Y, Louradour J, Collobert R and Weston J 2009 Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
       Conference on Machine Learning  ICML ’09 (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
        Machinery) pp 41–48 URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1553374.1553380
[25]  Curry  R,  Lynn  J  E,  Schmidt  K  E  and  Gezerlis  A  2023  Phys.  Rev.  Res. 5(4)  L042021  URL
        https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.L042021
[26]  Pfau D, Spencer J S, Matthews A G D G and Foulkes W M C 2020 Phys. Rev. Res. 2(3) 033429
        URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429
[27]  Hermann J, Sch¨atzle Z and No´e F 2020 Nature Chemistry 12 891–897 URL https://doi.org/10.
       1038/s41557-020-0544-y
[28]  Gaudin M, Gillespie J and Ripka G 1971  Nuclear  Physics  A 176 237–260 URL  https://www.
        sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375947471902673
[29]  Viteritti  L  L,  Rende  R  and  Becca  F  2023  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  130(23)  236401  URL  https:
       //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.130.236401
[30]  Rende R, Viteritti L L, Bardone L, Becca F and Goldt S 2024 Communications Physics 7 260 URL
        https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-024-01732-4
[31]  Luo D and Clark B K 2019 Phys. Rev. Lett. 122(22) 226401 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
       10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.226401
[32]  Arovas  D  P,  Berg  E,  Kivelson  S  A  and  Raghu  S  2022  Annual  Review  of  Condensed  Matter
       Physics  13  239–274  URL  https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/
        annurev-conmatphys-031620-102024
[33]  Kuroki K, Onari S, Arita R, Usui H, Tanaka Y, Kontani H and Aoki H 2008  Phys. Rev. Lett.
       101(8) 087004 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.087004
[34]  Maier T, Berlijn T and Scalapino D J 2019 Phys. Rev. B 99(22) 224515 URL https://link.aps.
        org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.99.224515
[35]  Bohm D and Pines D 1951 Phys. Rev. 82(5) 625–634 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
        PhysRev.82.625
[36]  Bickers  N  E,  Scalapino  D  J  and  White  S  R  1989  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  62(8)  961–964  URL
        https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.62.961
[37]  Vicentini  F,  Hofmann  D,  Szab´o  A,  Wu  D,  Roth  C,  Giuliani  C,  Pescia  G,  Nys  J,  Vargas-
        Calder´on  V,  Astrakhantsev  N  and  Carleo  G  2022  SciPost  Phys.  Codebases  7  URL  https:
       //scipost.org/10.21468/SciPostPhysCodeb.7
[38]  Rende R and Loris Viteritti L 2025 Machine Learning:  Science and Technology 6 010501 URL
        https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/ada1a0
[39]  Hu  W  J,  Becca  F,  Parola  A  and  Sorella  S  2013  Phys.  Rev.  B  88(6)  060402  URL  https:
       //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.060402
[40]  Nomura Y and Imada M 2021 Phys. Rev. X  11(3) 031034 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
       1103/PhysRevX.11.031034