        Quantum Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Maxwell’s
Equations: Circuit Design, “Black Hole” Barren Plateaus Mitigation,
                                          and GPU Acceleration

        Ziv Chena,c∗       Gal G. Shavinerb     Hemanth Chandravamsib     Shimon Pisnoyb
                                      Steven H. Frankelb,c     Uzi Perega,c

                    aThe Andrew and Erna Viterbi Faculty of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
                                 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
             bFaculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

                cHelen Diller Quantum Center, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.


                                                        Abstract
         Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising approach for
         solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by embedding the governing physics into the
         loss function associated with a deep neural network. In this work, aQuantum Physics-
         Informed Neural Network(QPINN) framework is proposed to solve two-dimensional (2D)
         time-dependent Maxwell’s equations. Our approach utilizes a parametrized quantum circuit
         (PQC)inconjunctionwiththeclassicalneuralnetworkarchitectureandenforcesphysicallaws,
         including a global energy conservation principle, during training. A quantum simulation
         library,TorQ - Tensor Operations for Research in Quantum systems,was developed to
         efficiently compute circuit outputs and derivatives by leveraging GPU acceleration based on
         PyTorch, enabling end-to-end training of the QPINN. The method was evaluated on two
         2D electromagnetic wave propagation problems: one in free space (vacuum) and the other
         has an added dielectric medium. Multiple quantum circuit ansätze, input scales, and an
         added loss term were compared in a thorough ablation study. Furthermore, recent techniques
         to enhance PINN convergence, including random Fourier feature embeddings and adaptive
         time weighting, have been incorporated. Our results demonstrate that the QPINN achieves
         accuracy comparable to, and even greater than, the classical PINN baseline, while using
         a significantly smaller number of trainable parameters. This study also demonstrates that
         adding an energy conservation term to the loss stabilizes training and improves the physical
         fidelity of the solution in the lossless free-space case. This added term helps mitigate a
         new kind of barren plateau (BP) related phenomenon -“black hole”(BH) loss landscape
         for the quantum experiments in that scenario. By optimizing the quantum-circuit ansatz
         and embedding energy-conservation constraints, our QPINN achieves up to a19%higher
         accuracy on 2D Maxwell benchmark problems compared to a classical PINN.
KeywordsQuantum Machine Learning and Maxwell’s Equations · QPINNs· Barren Plateaus· Ansatz
Design
1  Introduction
Recent advances in quantum computing have drawn growing interest due to its potential to accelerate scientific
machine learning. Among the promising approaches in this domain arePhysics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) [1, 2, 3], which have emerged as mesh-free, differentiable function-approximation frameworks for
solving forward and inverse problems governed by ordinary differential equations (ODEs)/ PDEs [4, 5]. PINNs
have been successfully applied to problems in wave propagation [6], fluid dynamics [7], solid mechanics [8], and
electromagnetic simulations [9]. Building on this foundation, QPINNs extend the classical PINNs paradigm
by embedding parametrized quantum circuits (PQCs) within the neural network ansatz, either partially or
fully replacing classical components [10, 11]. The integration of quantum models into PINNs is motivated by

    ∗Corresponding author:ziv.chen@campus.technion.ac.il


                                                              1
the prospect of enhanced expressivity and improved scalability, particularly for high-dimensional problems
where classical neural networks often face limitations.
    Recent works on QPINNs have explored hybrid quantum-classical PINN architectures on simple benchmark
problems, demonstrating feasibility for ODEs and small-scale PDEs. For instance, Trahan et al. [11] employed
a QPINN architecture to solve a an ODE (spring-mass oscillator) and a PDE (Poisson’s equation), and
employed a hybrid architecture for the one-dimensional Burgers’ equation. Sedykh et al. [12] extended the
framework to a three-dimensional fluid flow problem using a hybrid QPINN, reporting improved accuracy over
classical PINNs in a complex geometry. These early studies indicate that QPINNs are capable of solving PDEs
and can sometimes yield improved accuracy or parameter efficiency. However, despite these promising results,
prior work has primarily focused on relativelysimple and canonical problems, and the performance of QPINNs
on high-dimensional, unsteady, and nonlinear systems remains largely unexplored. Motivated by this, in the
present work, we study challenges associated with using QPINNs to solve the set of coupled two-dimensional,
time-dependent Maxwell’s equations - representative of multi-dimensional unsteady field problems. Notable
works related to solving Maxwell’s equations using classical PINN networks include: [13,14,15,16,17,18].
    Despite the success of PINNs and their broad applicability, training them remains notoriously hard [19]
due to several practical issues. These include (a)spectral bias, wherein high-frequency components are
learned significantly more slowly than low-frequency modes, (b) the complex loss landscapes associated with
high-dimensional, multiscale problems, and (c) strong sensitivity to hyperparameter choices. To address these
limitations, a range of architectural and training strategies have been proposed in the literature to enhance
convergence, stability, and generalization [20, 19, 21, 3, 22, 23, 24]. These techniques have been demonstrated
to substantially enhance PINN performance across various applications. In this work, we incorporate a subset
of these architectural enhancements within the QPINN framework, focusing specifically on their application
to two-dimensional time-dependent Maxwell’s equations.
    In this paper, we develop a QPINN for solving the 2D time-dependent Maxwell’s equations and conduct a
detailed analysis of the quantum network ansatz and enforcement of physical conservation laws. The study
focuses on a model problem of electromagnetic pulse propagation both in free space (vacuum) and through a
dielectric medium. Our contributions are as follows:
      • We develop the first hybrid quantum-classical PINN for Maxwell’s equations, embedding a PQC as a
          neural network layer and leveraging an in-house GPU-accelerated PyTorch-based quantum simulator
          with native automatic differentiation for PDE residuals - something no prior work has combined.
      • We observe a new phenomenon, BH, in which after several hundred epochs of descending toward an
          approximate PDE solution, the solution suddenly descends to the trivial solution instead. Due to
          this effect, the solution has no physical meaning, and its values become approximately 0 at every
          point in space and time but t = 0as it captures only the initial condition. This collapse is distinct
          from known BP and laziness effects [25] (elaborated in section5).
      • We introduce a novel, physics-informed penalty based on the Poynting energy conservation law. We
          demonstrate that enforcing this global constraint is crucial to avoid BH collapse in the free-space
          case.
      • We perform a comprehensive ablation, including six quantum ansätze and five input-angle encoding
          schemes, demonstrating exactly how circuit depth, entanglement pattern, and encoding choice affect
          both convergence and final accuracy.
      • We carry out a head-to-head comparison of our QPINN against a leading classical PINN architecture
          on both vacuum and dielectric test cases, quantifying errors, convergence rates, and the impact of
          the energy-conservation term.
    The rest of the paper is structured in the following manner: Section2describes the problem setup and
methodology (2.1), including the Maxwell equations, the PINN and QPINN formulations (2.2,2.3), and
the quantum circuit ansatz designs. In Section3, we detail the custom quantum simulation approach and
optimization strategy. Section4presents the experiments and results for the two test scenarios (4.1,4.2),
with comparisons of different ansätze and analysis of the impact of the energy conservation term. This section
also elaborates on the “black hole” phenomenon (5). Section6provides a discussion of the implications of
our findings, including advantages and current limitations of the QPINN approach, followed by concluding
remarks and potential directions for future research.

2  Methodology and problem formulation

2.1  Maxwell’s equations in two dimensions and problem setup
The microscopic form of Maxwell’s equations governs the behavior of electric and magnetic fields in space
and time. They are expressed as:


                                                                 2
                                                                                         (            )
                        ∇·E=  ρε, ∇·B= 0, ∇×E=−       ∂B∂t , ∇×B=µ                         J+ε  ∂E∂t    .             (1a–d)

    HereEandBdenote the electric and magnetic fields;         ρ is the electric charge density;Jis the current
density; ε is the electric permittivity; and µ is the magnetic permeability. In regions free of charges and
currents, these equations simplify to:

                                            ∇×B=µε    ∂E∂t, ∇×E=−    ∂B∂t                             (2a–b)

    For linear, isotropic, and homogeneous materials, the constitutive relations connecting the electric fieldE,
magnetic fieldB, electric displacement fieldD, and the magnetizing fieldHare given by:
                                                      D=εE,   B=µH                                            (3a–b)
whereεandµdenote the permittivity and permeability of the medium, respectively.
    Substituting Eqs.3    a–b into Eq.2   a–b, the Maxwell’s equations in terms of the electric fieldEand the
magnetic fieldHare obtained:
                                            ∂E
                                            ∂t  = 1ε∇×H,     ∂H∂t  =−   1µ∇×E                             (4a–b)
    For simplicity, a transverse electric (TEz) polarization, where the electric field has only a z-component
Ez(x,y,t)(out of plane) and the magnetic field has in-plane components(  Hx(x,y,t),Hy(x,y,t))was used.
The Maxwell equations for this 2D TE case can be written as:
                          ∂Ez        (∂Hy              )                    ∂Ez                   ∂Ez
                           ∂t   = 1ε     ∂x − ∂Hx∂y      ,  ∂Hx∂t   =−   1µ  ∂y ,  ∂Hy∂t   =  1µ   ∂x                (5a–c)

    The permittivity and permeability are different by several orders of magnitude, so the equations are
manipulated by changing the electric field:                     √
                                                           ˜E=      ε0
                                                                    µ0 E                                      (6)
 Hence Eqs.5a–cbecome:
                ∂ ˜Ez             (∂Hy              )                           ∂ ˜Ez                       ∂ ˜Ez
                 ∂t   =      1√ε0µ0   ∂x − ∂Hx∂y      ,  ∂Hx∂t   =−       1√ε0µ0∂y ,  ∂Hy∂t   =      1√ε0µ0  ∂x         (7a–c)

    After the transformation in Eq.6, the field amplitudes          ˜Ez, Hx, andHy become comparable in magnitude.
This allows us to normalize the permittivity and permeability by setting ε0  = µ0  =  1, which improves
numerical stability. In vacuum, the material parameters are given by ε =ε0 andµ =µ0. In dielectric regions,
we assume µ = µ0 remains constant, while the permittivity becomes ε = εrε0. In our setup, the relative
permittivity is set to εr = 4inside the dielectric medium. For notational simplicity, we drop the tilde and
henceforth denote the normalized electric field simply asE  z.
    The domain in which both cases were tested is spatially periodic x,y∈   [−1, 1]. The time domain in the
vacuum case wast∈  [0, 1.5]to capture wall-reflection effects and in the dielectric case  t∈  [0, 0.7]so the waves
were well contained within the boundaries to simulate a boundaryless space.(2order×#occurrences of the relevant input dependence )
    Closs, per point ≈1  +  ∑needed derivatives
2.2  PINN architecture and convergence enhancements
As a baseline, a classical PINN for the 2D Maxwell problem is first established, which is also the basis for our
hybrid QPINN. The solution fields are represented by a neural network fθ(x,y,t)with trainable parameters
θ. The network takes continuous coordinates(      x,y,t)as input and outputs a vector(    Ez,Hx,Hy)which
constitutes the PINN’s prediction for the fields at that point.
Residuals for each equation are defined to calculate the PDE loss -Lphys. For the first equation, in the
vacuum test case, a single residual is defined:
                                                                   (∂Hy             )
                                            res1,vac    = ∂ ˜Ez∂t −   ∂x − ∂Hx∂y       ,                             (9)

While in the dielectric test case, two residuals are defined. The first (res1,vac ) is the same as in the vacuum
case (9) and consists of the points in the vacuum part of the domain, and consists of the points in the


                                                                 3
dielectric part of the domain:                                       (∂Hy              )
                                          res1,diel   = ∂ ˜Ez∂t −  1εr   ∂x − ∂Hx∂y       ,                           (11)

Residuals 2 and 3 are the same for both cases:

                                        res2 = ∂Hx∂t   + ∂ ˜Ez∂y ,  res3 = ∂Hy∂t − ∂ ˜Ez∂x                       (12a–b)

A physics-informed lossL       phys that penalizes the PDE residuals is defined as follows (one for each case):
                               Lphys, vac =MSE(res        1,vac  ) +MSE(res        2) +MSE(res        3)                   (13)
 Lphys, diel =MSE(res        1,vac  (x,y,t) ∈N   vac) +MSE(res        1,diel  (x,y,t) ∈N   diel) +MSE(res        2) +MSE(res        3) (14)
where Nvac is the number of collocation points in the grid in which ε = 1, and Ndiel are the rest of the
collocation points. The MSE function is defined as follows:
                                                                          ∑
                                        MSE(F(x,y,t)   ∈N  ) =  1N               F 2(x,y,t)                           (15)
                                                                        x,y,t∈N
In the dielectric case, this loss function weights equally the vacuum part and the dielectric part of the domain,
even though there are fewer collocation points in the dielectric part than in the vacuum part. The emphasis
on the dielectric part stabilizes convergence and avoids BH as explained later, in subsection5.1. The grid
size used was64    3 (64 per coordinate), spread equally.
    The initial conditions are the same for both cases, a 2-D Gaussian pulse in the electric field, while the
magnetic fields are initialized as zero:

                                                Ez0(x,y,t= 0) =e  −25(x          2+y    2)                               (16)
                                                      Hx0(x,y,t= 0) = 0                                  (17)
                                                      Hy0(x,y,t= 0) = 0                                  (18)
Therefore, the initial-condition lossL       IC is defined as follows:[
               LIC =    1      ∑     (E z(x,y,0)−E    z0(x,y,t= 0))   2 + (H x(x,y,0))   2 + (H y(x,y,0))   2]                   (19)
                        Nx,y   x,y

 whereN     x,y is the amount of collocation points in thex-yplane, i.e.64                  2 in this case.
    It is possible to add any other loss terms that fit the specific problem to aid in convergence, while
accounting for the caveat that each added loss term enlarges the optimization tradeoff against other loss
terms if they do not fully comply with each other. In this case, two more loss terms are added.

    The first term is symmetry loss, which penalizes deviations from spatial (anti-)symmetry values. In the
vacuum case, the PDE+IC+domain are invariant under reflections x→−x   and y→−y   . With a centered
Gaussian initial condition inE  z and uniform(ε,µ)imply the following parities:

       (i)E  z is even inxandy:         E       z(x,y,t) =E   z(−x,y,t) =E    z(x,−y,t),
       (ii)H   x is even inxand odd iny:    H     x(x,y,t) =H   x(−x,y,t), H    x(x,y,t) =−H    x(x,−y,t),
       (iii)H   y is odd inxand even iny:   H      y(x,y,t) =−H    y(−x,y,t), H    y(x,y,t) =H   y(x,−y,t).
We encode these parities with a symmetry penaltyL  sym defined below, where for any fieldfwe write
f mirrx(x,y,t) :=f(−x,y,t)andf                                    mirry(x,y,t) :=f(x,−y,t).
                                                ∑     [(Ez−E     mirrxz)2 +(Ez−E     mirryz  )2
                                 Lsym =  1N             /bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
                                               (x,y,t)                     (i)
                                                     +(Hx−H     mirrxx  )2 +(Hx +H     mirryx )2
                                                        /bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright(20)
                                                                           (ii)
                                                                        )2 +(Hy−H     mirryy  )2 ]
                                                     +(Hy +H     mirrxy/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright,

                                                                           (iii)

                                                                  4
    In the dielectric case, the terms mirrored along the x axis should be omitted, as the dielectric medium
addition cancels the symmetry along this axis.

    The second term isenergy conservation loss-   Lenergy. An important physical property of Maxwell’s
equations (in lossless media) is the conservation of electromagnetic energy. In a closed domain with periodic
boundaries and no absorption, the total energy of the fields should remain constant in time. Numerically,
PINN solutions might violate this principle due to approximation errors. A global energy conservation term
in the loss is introduced to push the network towards this invariance according to the Poynting theorem:

                                                       −∂u∂t  =∇·S+J·E                                          (21)

    where−∂u∂t is the rate of decrease of electromagnetic energy density in the volume,∇·Sis the net energy
flux out of the volume - i.e., Poynting vector divergence, andJ  ·Eis the electrical work-rate density (Wm −3 )
done by the fields on the charges - i.e., the power per unit volume transferred from the field to matter, which
is positive when energy leaves the field and enters the charges. For Maxwell’s equations,

                                  u≡    12(E·D+B·H)
                                          (εE2z +µ (H2x +H    2y   ))= 1    (εE2z +H    2x +H    2y).                            (22)
                                     = 12                                 2

Furthermore
                                      S=E×H⇒S         x =−E   zHy,  Sy =E zHx                        (23)
and
                                                             J·E= 0,                                            (24)
µ = 1, hence the last expression in Eq. (22), and Eq. (24) is correct due to the fact that in the problems
considered hereJ= 0. Now the energy residual can be evaluated, which represents our energy conservation
loss:                                        (                                       )
                               Lenergy =       εEz∂Ez∂t   +H x∂Hx∂t   +H y∂Hy∂t
                                             (∂Ez                     )    (∂Ez                     )                   (25)
                                          −      ∂x Hy +E z∂Hy∂x         +     ∂y Hx +E z∂Hx∂y

    In the lossless, time-independent setting considered here, the local Poynting balance ∂tu +∇· (E×H      ) = 0
is implied by the TEz Maxwell system (Eq.5    a–c). Hence,Lenergy does not add new physics; it reweights a
continuum identity. This reweighting was found to be beneficial in the QPINN runs of the vacuum test case
(Subsec.4.1) because it penalizes spurious global amplitude decay (the “black-hole” failure mode, Subsec.5),
but it can be detrimental in heterogeneous media where the PDE residual scales with1   /ε(x)while the energy
residual scales with ε(x), leading to stiff, unbalanced gradients near interfaces, as in the dielectric test case
(Subsec.4.2).
    Including the loss termLenergy aids the training process in two ways: it provides a global feedback that
couples the network’s errors across the domain (e.g., if the network tries to introduce a spurious attenuation or
growth in the wave amplitude, it will be penalized), and it encodes a physical constraint that might otherwise
require many PDE residual points to capture. The derivatives in this loss term were already calculated, hence
its computational overhead is negligible. In addition, it turns out that theenergy conservation losshad a
significant impact on the network’s convergence, and it was thus an integral part of this ablation study.
    The total loss combines the contributions from the initial condition, symmetry, and the equations’ residual
(L  phys) losses:
                                       Ltot =L   phys  + 10L    IC + 10L    sym + 10L    energy                        (26)
Several recently developed techniques to improve PINN training were also incorporated:
      • Random Fourier Features (RFF):A mapping layer that embeds(       x,y,t)into a higher-dimensional
          feature space was applied using randomized sinusoidal features [26, 20]. Specifically, the inputs were
          transformed as( x,y,t)↦→(cos(Ω[  x,y,t]T ),sin (Ω[  x,y,t]T ))whereΩis a fixed random projection
          tensor whose entries are sampled from a Gaussian distribution and remain constant throughout
          training (i.e., they are not trainable parameters). This transformation incorporates high-frequency
          components into the input representation, enhancing the network’s capacity to capture multiscale
          features of the PDE solution and thereby mitigating spectral bias inherent in PINNs.


                                                                  5
      • Strict spatial periodicity enforcement:The  x and y coordinates are each mapped through sine
          and cosine functions, scaled according to the domain length, to enforce periodic boundary conditions.
          Specifically, for an input(x,y,t)we replacexbyx              sin andx   cos:
                                                           xsin = sin(2πx/L  x)                               (27)
                                                           xcos = cos(2πx/L    x)                               (28)
          and similarly for y, where Lx,Ly are the domain lengths. This ensures fθ(x)≡f θ(x +Lx)and
          fθ(y)≡f θ(y +Ly)for the domain boundaries, eliminating the need for an explicit boundary loss
          term as suggested by Dong et al. [24].
      • Periodic time domain mapping:the        t coordinate is also passed through a sin and cos mapping,
          but instead of dividing by the domain length, the denominator (the periodicity time length) is a
          learned parameter to the neural network, as the simulation length is not long enough to complete a
          full period.
      • Adaptive temporal weighting:A time-domain curriculum strategy similar to Wang et al. [     2] is
          adopted, such that the network learns early-time dynamics first. In practice, the collocation points
          are divided into M = 5time bins, with lower loss residual weights assigned to subsequent time bins
          at the beginning of training; these weights are gradually increased as the network converges on the
          early-time dynamics. This method allows the model to focus on the early-time behavior (closer
          to initial conditions), thus propagating the solution forward in a causality-respecting manner. For
          further details, refer to [18].
    Using these enhancements, the classical PINN with a feed-forward architecture (fully connected layers)
was trained. In our experiments, a network with4hidden layers as used in Shaviner et al. [     18], and two
additional networks for experimentation, with an extra layer and a reduced layer. Each layer consists of
H  = 128neurons, except the first one after the RFF layer that is set to256neurons, because the RFF
layer has128   sine and128   cosine outputs. Aside from the sinusoidal embedding, all models (Fig.1) used
hyperbolic tangent activations on hidden layers. Training was performed using the Adam optimizer [27], with
a learning rate of0.001, that decayed by a factor of0.85every2000epochs.



























Figure 1: Schematic of a classical PINN architecture employed in the present work for solving 2D Maxwell’s
equations. The inputs(    x,y,t)are mapped to outputs(      Ez,Hx,Hy). A periodic mapping layer first enforces
strict periodic boundary conditions in space and learned periodicity in time, followed by a random Fourier
feature (RFF) layer that expands the inputs into a higher-dimensional sinusoidal feature space.  The
transformed inputs then pass through fully connected hidden layers before producing the final field outputs.



                                                                 6
2.3  QPINN architecture and ansatz designs
Our QPINN extends the classical PINN by replacing the second-to-last layer of the classical neural network
with a PQC. The location was chosen such that the layer is near the end of the network, which isassumedto
bear more impact. Nevertheless, we do not use it as the last one to guarantee a generic amount of outputs.
This is much easier to achieve using a classical layer rather than a quantum one. In essence, a hybrid model
fθ(x,y,t), where   θ is a parameter vector that includes both classical network parameters and parameters of
the constructed quantum circuit. The PQC’s architecture is structured by first setting an angle embedding
layer, followed by L ansatz layers, and finally a Pauli-Z measurement. This architecture is depicted in Fig.2,
where 7 qubits and 4 layers are used in all experiments. The amount of classical learnable parameters in all
QPINN models is 66848 for all ansatz types.




















Figure 2: Schematic of the QPINN architecture. It shares the same overall structure as the PINN in Fig.1,
but a quantum circuit layer is inserted near the output. The preceding classical layer and subsequent output
layer adjust dimensions for the quantum layer’s 7 qubits (each qubit acting as a neuron).
    The integration between the classical and quantum neural networks layer, i.e., the PQC, is done based on
an angle embedding such that the output values propagate from the activation layer preceding the PQC,
into the PQC itself. The angle embedding layer in the PQC rotates each qubit around the X axis by an
angle that corresponds to the scaled activation layer output. Five different scaling methods are tested in this
experiment, as the variableatakes thetanhoutput values, ranging between[−1,1]:

   scalenone(a) =a⇒∈[−1,1],  scale          π(a) =a·π⇒∈[−π,π],  scale           bias(a) =     (a+ 1)2 ·π⇒∈[0,π],

   scaleasin(a) = arcsin (a) +   π2 ⇒∈[0,π],  scale    acos(a) = arccos (a)⇒∈[0,π]
                                                                                                                                (29a–e)
    This choice of scaling aims to utilize the Bloch sphere with a better distinction between the inputs, as
illustrated in figure3c. Furthermore, when using the Pauli-Z measurement, several considerations apply. The
first is that only the projection along the z-axis in the Bloch sphere matters, hence symmetric angle rotations
yield the same probabilities for different results, such as−1and1, which are supposed to be the most distant
from one another in thetanh output. The second consideration is that using Pauli-Z measurement after angle
embedding results in a sinusoidal shape of the results (as can be seen in Figs.3a,3b). Thereby,       scaleasin and
scaleacos are also tested to help shape the probability density into a uniform one, as shown in Fig.3d.
    The six ansätze picked for this ablation study are based on previous selections [28, 29, 30]. The ansätze
are presented in Fig.4. Each ansatz layer consists of two parts: parametrized single qubit rotation gates
applied on each qubit and two-qubit gates, that can be either parametrized or not.
The ansätze are:
      1.Basic Entangling Layers (4a): in this ansatz, the single qubit rotations areRotgates:
                                                   Rot(α,β,γ) =RZ(γ)RY(β)RZ(α)                        (30)
          which are arbitrary rotations around the Bloch sphere, using 3 parameters per gate. The two-qubit
          gates are constructed by a cyclic chain ofCNOTgates connecting nearest-neighbor qubits.


                                                                   7
                                (a)                                                                    (b)
















                                                                    (c)















                                                                    (d)
Figure 3: Effect of input-angle scalings for the  Rx embedding and Z readout.  (a) General case with
linear inputs a∈   [−1, 1]: with ⟨Z⟩     = cosθ   , scaleacos (θ = arccosa     ) yields⟨Z⟩     =a (identity) and scaleasin
(θ = arcsina          + π2) yields⟨Z⟩     =−a  (sign flip). (b) Same analysis for our actual setting, where the PQC
receives tanh-bounded activations a∈   [−1, 1]from the preceding layer. (c) Distribution of the scaled angles
θ induced by each mapping in Eqs.29    a–e for a∼Unif     [−1, 1]. (d) Probability distribution of the Pauli-Z
measurement outcomes for the corresponding inputs in (c).


       2. Strongly Entangling Layers (4b): this ansatz is similar to theBasic Entangling Layersansatz, but
           the gap between the target and control qubits in each layer is incremented by 1. This means that the
           first layer will be the same as the first layer of theBasic Entangling Layers, but in the second one,
           the first gate will beCNOT(0, 2), thenCNOT(1, 3), and so on. The motivation behind choosing the
           Basic and Strongly is that they are both widely used, especially the basic one, many times referred to
           as “hardware efficient ansatz", usually when considering the architecture of superconducting qubits.
       3. Cross-Mesh (4c): in this ansatz, the single qubit rotations are   RXα(i)   gates, which have a single
           parameter. The entangling part of each layer consists of CRZβ(i,j)    gates, connecting each qubit to


                                                                     8
                               (a)                                                                 (b)








                               (c)                                                                 (d)








                               (e)                                                                 (f)
Figure 4: Schematics of all ansätze used in this study. (a) Basic Entangling Layers. (b) Strongly Entangling
Layers. (c) Cross-Mesh. (d) Cross-Mesh-2-Rotations. (e) Cross-Mesh-CNOT. (f) No Entanglement Ansatz.


          each of the other qubits:


                                                                     N−1∏N−1∏
                                             Entangling Part=                   CRZ(i,j)   α(i,j)                         (31)
                                                                      i=0  j̸=i

          There are three main reasons behind testing theCross-Meshansatz here: the first is to check if
          a “fully-connected” circuit achieves better results than less-connected circuits, analogous to the
          difference between fully-connected layers and convolutional layers in a classical neural network. The
          second reason is checking if and how the full connectivity affects BH, and the third is that there are
          hardware implementations able to apply all of those gates in parallel as Nemirovsky et al. [31]. This
          ansatz had196quantum learnable parameters.
      4. Cross-Mesh-2-Rotations (4d): this ansatz is almost identical to theCross-Mesh, but instead of having
          only RXα(i)   per qubit in the single qubit rotations part, it has RXα(i)  RZβ(i)  . This ansatz had224
          quantum learnable parameters.
      5. Cross-Mesh-CNOT (4e): this ansatz is similar to the previousCross-Meshes, but it hasRotgates in
          the single qubit rotations part, and instead of parametrized CRZβ(i,j)    gates, it consists ofCNOT
          gates connected in the same manner.
      6. No Entanglement Ansatz (4f): this ansatz consists only of aRotgate per qubit in each layer,
          without any two-qubit gates. The motivation for using such an ansatz is to investigate the effect of
          entanglement on our QPINN model, as the role of entanglement in QML is not fully understood [32].
The ansätze besidesCross-Mesh,Cross-Mesh-2-Rotations, andCross-Mesh-CNOThad84quantum learnable
parameters besides the classical learnable parameters (summary of learnable parameters can be found in
Table1).
    The measurement method used here was to measure the expectation value of a Pauli-Z observable
measurement for each qubit, and each qubit was considered a “neuron” for the subsequent layer. The
circuit is differentiable with respect to both the circuit parameters and the input angles, so automatic
differentiation is enabled to update classical and quantum parameters and to get the derivatives for the PDE.
The runs throughout this work were all made by a classical simulator, so derivatives were calculated using
backpropagation. When running on real quantum hardware, this would not be possible, and other methods
such as theparameter-shift rule[33] should be used.


                                                                  9
           Table 1: Summary of the number of learnable parameters in each network architecture.
                          Ansatz / network’s             # Classical     # Quantum           # Total
                             hidden layers               parameters       parameters       parameters
                           Classical - regular              82820               0             82820
                       Classical - reduced layer            66308               0             66308
                        Classical - extra layer             99332               0             99332
                              Cross-Mesh                    66848             196             67044
                       Cross-Mesh-2-Rotations               66848             224             67072
                          Cross-Mesh-CNOT                   66848              84             66932
                      No Entanglement Ansatz                66848              84             66932
                       Basic Entangling Layers              66848              84             66932
                     Strongly Entangling Layers             66848              84             66932

3  Quantum simulator and performance optimization
All experiments in this work were run on a classical GPU-based ideal quantum simulator. Moreover, all runs
were noiseless and calculated analytically, meaning that the measurements’ values were determined according
to the circuit’s final state-vector (no “shots” used). However, it should be noted that this architecture doesn’t
require additional measurements, but rather multiple shots per circuit and the use of a hardware-compatible
differentiation method when running on quantum hardware. Gradients were computed via backpropagation
on the simulator. We developedTorQ - Tensor Operations for Research in Quantum systems, an in-house
quantum simulation library using PyTorch, which we found to be over 50× faster than using PennyLane’s
default.qubit simulator with Torch integration (see Table2). Qiskit runs were slower than PennyLane’s.
The custom simulator also had significantly better memory usage: the largest grid of collocation points we
could run without memory overflow was87    3 on our simulator, versus43          3 on PennyLane’s default.qubit.
All simulations were run on NVIDIA L40s and A100 GPUs. We did not use mini-batching or multi-GPU
training, since, according to Hao et al. [34], PINN batch training yields worse results, and using multiple
GPUs behaves similarly to mini-batching.

                    Table 2: Comparison between different PennyLane simulators and TorQ
  Package name             Hardware                Simulator           Diff. method         Grid size     Average seconds
                                                                                                          per epoch
   PennyLane          CPU for the PQC,           default.qubit       backpropagation           403            7.729721
                      GPU for the rest
   PennyLane          CPU for the PQC,           default.qubit       backpropagation           433            9.580446
                      GPU for the rest
   PennyLane                  GPU                lightning.gpu             adjoint              53           113.327774
   PennyLane                  GPU              lightning.kokkos            adjoint              53           99.751072
       TorQ                   GPU                       -            backpropagation           403            0.145136
       TorQ                   GPU                       -            backpropagation           873            0.849967

4  Experiments and results
In this section, the ablation study results are presented for both test cases, and the metric each experiment is
evaluated according to is L2 relative error norm (later referred to as L2 error for convenience) of the electric
field Ez compared to a high-fidelity4 th-order Padé scheme, considered as a high-fidelity reference solution.
The error is computed over a dense grid of512×512spatial points and 1500 time steps:
                                                     /radicaltp
                                                     /radicalvertex∑N(            )2
                                                     /radicalvertexE(n)z −E    (n)
                                                     /radicalvertexn=1      z,Padé
                                       L2 error=     /radicalvertex(           )2   ,                         (32)
                                                     √      ∑N
                                                               n=1   (E  (n)z,Padé
wherenindexes the grid points in space and time.
    Each ablation study (vacuum and dielectric) consists of multiple QPINN runs varying: (1) the ansatz,
(2) the input scaling, and (3) whether the energy conservation loss termLenergy (Eq.25) is included. For
comparison, classical PINN runs with different network depths (regular, extra layer, and reduced layer) were
also performed, both with and without the energy conservation loss term. Each configuration was run 5


                                                              10
                   (a)                                        (b)                                            (c)
Figure 5: (a) Initial conditions (i.e. t = 0) for both test cases, with the training size grid (64    2). Contours of
the electric field Ez at the final time of the wave propagation are shown for (b) vacuum at t = 1.5and (c)
dielectric medium at t = 0.7, as obtained from the QPINN simulations. The corresponding classical PINN
and Padé scheme solutions appear visually identical; please refer to [18] for the classical results. The region
occupied by the dielectric medium is shaded in (c).

times to compute the mean and standard deviation. Results of the final time slice for both cases are shown
in Fig.5.

4.1  Case 1: Pulse in vacuum
According to Figs.6and7, four key observations can be made for the vacuum case:
      1. Scalesandansätze:Theperformanceusingdifferentscalingmethodscanbedividedintotwogroups:
          scaleπ and scalebias performed poorly compared to the other scaling methods; the other scalings
          achieved similar results. For comparison, the scaleπ achieved higher L2 errors than the scaleasin
          by more than62%. From the comparison of different ansätze after omitting the       scaleπ because it
          wouldn’t be used for such case according to its performance across all ansätze, the Cross-Mesh-CNOT
          and No Entanglement Ansatz performed worse than the other ansätze, the Cross-Mesh-2-Rotations
          achieved similar accuracy to the classical and the rest were much better as the Cross-Mesh-CNOT
          had higher L2 error than the Strongly Entangling Layers by approximately14%. However, the
          different ansätze didn’t vary as much as the different scales, meaning that choosing a scale that fits
          the most is more impactful than choosing the most fitting ansatz.
      2. Parameter reduction:42        .2%of converged QPINN runs achieved lower   L2 errors than the classical
          regular-depth network, despite having approximately19%fewer total trainable parameters (Table1).
          To isolate the effect of parameter count, we also ran classical PINNs with a reduced layer (similar in
          terms of parameters to the quantum models) and an extra layer (approximately48%more parameters
          than the quantum models). The QPINN runs still outperformed both, indicating the quantum
          model’s efficiency is not solely due to fewer parameters.
      3. Faster convergence:The QPINN runs converged faster to the PDE solution than the PINN runs
         ( Fig.6a). This cannot be attributed simply to having fewer parameters, as the QPINN run also
          surpassed the PINN reduced-network case (that achieved a much worse final L2 error). Note that
          the QPINN run’s loss included the additional energy term, which the PINN run did not have.
      4. Impact of energy loss term:Including the energy conservation term   Lenergy (Eq.25) is critical in
          the vacuum case. Otherwise, the QPINN runs would suffer from the BH phenomenon. With the
          energy term included, the QPINN runs not only avoid this collapse, but also significantly outperform
          the PINN runs in L2 error. Interestingly, the PINN runs show the opposite effect: adding the energy
          loss term degrades their performance. In particular, this is the case for the ‘No Entanglement ansatz’,
          which behaves like a classical network in many aspects. For the PINN runs, the energy term remains
          a redundant bilinear penalty that distorts gradient scales and slows learning; we therefore observe
          consistent degradation. In contrast, the QPINN runs in the vacuum case are susceptible to the
          BH collapse: the PQC head has an expressive entangling ansatz that admits a degenerate low-loss
          trajectory that fades amplitudes after the initial slice. The energy penalty acts as a structural
          regularizer that removes this discrete failure mode and is therefore beneficial specifically for QPINNs.

4.2  Case 2: Pulse-dielectric medium interaction
Based on Figs.8and9, we make four observations for the dielectric case:


                                                                11
                                                                (a)



























                                                                (b)
Figure 6: (a) Mean loss (log scale) for the runs of the best combination for the vacuum case: Strongly
Entangling Layers ansatz with scaleacos and energy loss included. The semi-transparent band indicates the
standard deviation. (b) L2 errors for all combinations in the vacuum case. The dashed yellow line shows the
classical result for the regular-depth network; black stars mark runs that outperformed this baseline. The
dash-dot line indicates the best run’s error (highlighted by a gold star). An “X” denotes configurations where
none of the 5 runs converged.



                                                                12
                              (a)                                                                 (b)
Figure 7: Average L2 errors for the vacuum case grouped by (a) input scale and (b) ansatz, the scaleπ runs
were omitted from the average as they performed much worse than the rest of the scales in all ansätze. The
yellow dashed line shows the classical average error, and the dash-dot line (same color as the lowest bar)
shows the lowest average error achieved. In (b), the color for each bar is set according to theL      2 value.

      1. Scales and ansätze:Unlike the vacuum case, in the dielectric case, the variance between different
          scales is much smaller, as the worst scale - scalebias has a higher L2 error compared to the best
          scaling method - scalenone, by approximately13%. The gaps between ansätze are similar to the
          vacuum, where the Strongly Entangling Layers have approximately14%higher         L2 error than the
          No Entanglement Ansatz and the Cross-Mesh (for which the performance is almost the same on
          average).
      2. Parameter reduction:Similar to the vacuum case, there is a19%reduction in the total number of
          parameters achieved compared to the classical regular network (Table1). Nonetheless, the QPINN
          still performs competitively, and in many cases even outperforms the classical baseline.
      3. Stability:The dielectric runs are significantly more stable than the vacuum runs in terms of
          convergence and variance. Nearly all dielectric runs converge (there are no severe BH issues), and
          the spread in final errors is smaller.
      4. Effect of energy loss term:Including the energy loss term   Lenergy has a negative impact on the
          dielectric runs. Runs with the energy term generally yield higher errors than those without, for both
          classical and quantum models (with the possible exception of the Basic and Strongly Entangling
          ansätze, though those improvements could be statistical anomalies). Since BH does not manifest in
          the dielectric case, as almost all runs converge regardless, the added energy term remains a redundant
          bilinear penalty that distorts gradient scales and slows learning by creating a stiff constraint without
          added information.























                                                                 13
                                                                  (a)



























                                                                  (b)
Figure 8: (a) Mean loss (log scale) for the runs of the best combination for the dielectric case: No Entanglement
ansatz with scaleasin, without energy loss. The semi-transparent band indicates the standard deviation. (b)
L2 errors for all combinations in the dielectric case. The dashed yellow line shows the classical result for the
regular-depth network; black stars mark runs that outperformed this baseline. The dash-dot line indicates
the best run’s error (highlighted by a gold star).




                                                                  14
                               (a)                                                                   (b)
Figure 9: Average L2 errors for the dielectric case grouped by (a) input scale and (b) ansatz. The yellow
dashed line shows the classical average error, and the dash-dot line (same color as the lowest bar) shows the
lowest average error achieved. In (b), the color for each bar is set according to theL      2 value.
5  “Black hole” loss landscape
In the vacuum case without the energy-conservation loss, we consistently observe a catastrophic training
collapse to the trivial solution (TS). This TS is characterized by satisfying only the initial condition, and the
field amplitudes become nearly zero for all t> 0, matching the t = 0initial state and yielding a physically
meaningless solution (Fig.11). When it occurs consistently, we term this phenomenon the “black hole” loss
landscape (BH) phenomenon , as the initial conditions don’t matter - the loss landscape will eventually pull
the solution towards this collapse. This BH effect is distinct from known issues such as barren plateaus
(BPs) [35, 36], weak barren plateaus (WBPs) [37], and laziness training regime [25]. Unlike BPs and WBPs,
which are often associated with high-entanglement states or global cost functions, the BH collapse shows
no clear correlation with entanglement metrics, apart from that it doesn’t occur with the no entanglement
ansatz. As presented in Fig.10e, the Meyer-Wallach entanglement entropy [      38] remains essentially unchanged
throughout training and specifically during the collapse, and it is very similar between the runs with and
without energy conservation loss. Furthermore, the BH emerges despite the use of local observables, a single
Pauli-Z measurement per qubit as the objective. Moreover, whereas traditional BPs or laziness phenomena
typically manifest as vanishing gradients from the start of optimization, the BH phenomenon only occurs
after an initial period of successful learning.
    To make the notion of BH and the TS precise, an operational criterion based on the total electromagnetic
energy is defined. The total energy in time operator Uθ(t), a sum over the spatial dimensions of the operator
u, defined in Eq.22, defined as:    ∫

                                         1(εE2z(x,y,t;θ) +H          2x(x,y,t;θ) +H          2y(x,y,t;θ)  )dxdy
                          Uθ(t) =        2
                                      Ω     ∑      (εE2z(x,y,t;θ) +H          2x(x,y,t;θ) +H          2y(x,y,t;θ)  ),               (33)
                                 ≈ ∑              1
                                                  2
                                    x∈N     xy∈N     y
and the normalized energy:
                                                       ~Uθ(t) :=U   θ(t)/U  θ(0)                                (34)
We say thattraining exhibits collapse to the TSif there exists a small     δ> 0such that   mint∈[δ,T]   ~Uθ(t)≪ 1
whileLphys(θ)remains small. Equivalently, we report the scalar for cases with a constant energy amount
(i.e., there is no dissipation and no additional energy added after initialization):
                                                    IBH  :=  1−mint∈[δ,T]   ~Uθ(t),                                (35)

so that IBH close to1indicates collapse to the TS. ABH phenomenonis said to occur if over 95% of runs
with randomly chosen seeds collapse to the TS.
    Experimentally, on the order of10    2 training epochs of steadily decreasing L2 error, which means the
model does learn correctly, the quantum model withoutLenergy begins collapsing to a TS. This collapse is
evident from the sharp drop in gradient norms and variances (Figs.10c,10d) and the sudden drop in loss
once the network falls into the TS (Fig.10b). Importantly, adding the energy-conservation term completely


                                                                   15
mitigates this failure mode: with theLenergy term included, none of the vacuum QPINN runs exhibited BH
behavior, and the training instead continued to converge to the correct physical solution, while yielding better
accuracy than the PINN run on average. IncludingL           energy restores the skew-adjoint conservative structure,
i.e., a global energy invariance in the periodic, source-free case, making uniform “fade-to-zero” expensive and
eliminating the BH attractor; the result is stable convergence and improved accuracy (Fig.6).












                               (a)                                                                   (b)








                    (c)                                           (d)                                           (e)
Figure 10: (a) L2 error, (b) loss, (c) gradient norm, (d) gradient variance, and (e) global Meyer-Wallach
entanglement entropy, which is correlated to the amount of entanglement during optimization. The graphs
compare the results with and without the energy conservation loss term for the vacuum test case, averaged
over 5 runs. The legend to graphs (a) - (e) is the same, and appears in (a). Graphs (b) - (d) are presented in
log scale.
















                    (a)                                           (b)                                           (c)
Figure 11: Ez at (a) t = 0, (b) t = 0.3, and (c) t = 1.5(final time slice) in a QPINN run without energy
conservation loss. In (b) and (c), note the scale in the colorbar, which is approximately0.

5.1  Stabilizing the dielectric test case by the loss function
Unlike the QPINN runs in the vacuum test case, in the dielectric case, the BH phenomenon does not occur
when theLphys, diel as defined in Eq.14is used, thanks to a non-homogeneous loss that makes the zero
solution less favorable. When res1,diel  and thereforeLphys, diel are defined more intuitively (as res1,intuitive ,
andL       phys, intuitive) by:                                                (∂Hy               )

                                   res1,intuitive   (x,y,t) =  ∂ ˜Ez∂t −    1ε(x)  ∂x − ∂Hx∂y       ,                     (36)

Where ε(x)has a value of1for collocation points in the vacuum part of the domain and a value of   εr in the
dielectric part of the domain. The intuitive physics loss is defined by:
                          Lphys, intuitive =MSE(res        1,intuitive   ) +MSE(res        2) +MSE(res        3),                (37)


                                                                   16
where all collocation points weigh the same, the QPINN and PINN runs in the dielectric case experience the
same behavior as the QPINN runs in the vacuum case, in which, without adding the energy loss, they don’t
converge, but with it, they do. Overall, the results for runs usedLphys, intuitive and energy conservation loss
are worse than results for runs withLphys, diel (as the ones reported in Fig.8b). Hence, the loss used was the
one defined in Eq.14.
5.2  Impact of parameter initialization on “black holes”
We had several assumptions for why in the vacuum case, the QPINN runs suffer from BH, while the PINN runs
and the QPINN with the No Entanglement Ansatz (which would be referred to as classical for brevity for this
discussion) don’t. One was the tendency of the outputs of PQCs, as used in this work, with random parameter
initialization, to cluster around zero due to several effects. First, for expressive ansätze with randomly
initialized parameters that approximate unitary 2-designs, the expectation of any traceless observable (e.g.,
Pauli-Z) over the parameter ensemble is zero, and typical values concentrate near zero in high dimension;
formally, the Haar average satisfies:
                                                      E[⟨O⟩] = Tr(O)/d= 0                                 (38)
and the distribution narrows with system size [35, 39, 28]. Second, with a single Pauli-rotation data-encoding
layer (e.g.,RX(θ)per qubit), a fixed trainable block, and a Pauli readout, the model output is a first-harmonic
trigonometric polynomial without a constant term; hence its average overθ (uniform on[0  , 2π]) is exactly zero
[40]. Combined with the bounded range of Pauli expectations (⟨O⟩∈     [−1, 1]), this bias can create a “zero-field”
basin that impedes escape at early training. This provides intuition for why adding the energy-conservation
penalty improves optimization in the vacuum setting by reshaping gradients away from the trivial solution.
    Opposed to that, the outputs of a classical linear, fully connected layer with hyperbolic tangent activation
function, which is the second-to-last layer in our PINN comparison, "spread" much wider around zero even
though those outputs are bounded in[−1,1]as in the QPINN’s cases.
    We assumed that this difference was the root cause for the BH occurrence in the QPINN runs, as most
of its outputs are around zero and the TS is geometrically close to the random initialization on the loss
landscape. To test this assumption, several parameter initialization strategies were employed, and we tracked
the quantum layer’s outputs in the initial epoch (Fig.12). The initialization strategies tested were:
      •init reg: The method used throughout this work was random parameter initialization between[0  , 2π].
      •init zeros: Initializing all quantum parameters to 0. Without the angle embedding layer, this would
          result in all output values equal to 1.
      •init π: Initializing all quantum parameters toπ.
      •init π/2 : Initializing all quantum parameters toπ/2.
    The different initializations did not affect BH at all, and each run kept its original BH behavior as before.
According to this and Fig.12, we can infer that the different output spread at initialization is not the root
cause of BH in the QPINN runs, nor is it what mitigates BH in PINN runs; hence, this assumption is
refuted. Understanding why the QPINN runs exhibit BH but the classical ones don’t remains as a future
work direction.
























                                                                  17
                    (a)                                        (b)                                         (c)














                   (d)                                         (e)                                         (f)














                    (g)                                        (h)                                         (i)
Figure 12: Different outputs generated in the second-to-last layer in the network, either the quantum layer
or the hyperbolic tangent in the PINN runs. Each run was made with a different combination of ansatz,
scaling method, and parameter initialization method. The addition of the No Entanglement Ansatz was to
investigate the origin of BH further, as it is a quantum circuit, but it does not experience BH. Please note
the x-axis range.

6  Discussion and Conclusion

6.1  Discussion
Our results demonstrate that a hybrid quantum-classical PINN can successfully learn solutions for 2D
Maxwell’s equations, with better accuracy compared to a fully classical PINN, by more than19%    L2 error
reduction, and even better than much larger networks - the classical extra layer setup. The inclusion of a
quantum circuit does not degrade performance; in fact, in some runs, we observe that the QPINN achieves
exceptionally low errors, which hints at the potential representational advantages of the quantum ansatz.
However, these advantages do not consistently manifest across all trials, pointing to current optimization
challenges. Furthermore, much faster learning is observed in most QPINN runs, especially for the vacuum
case with an energy loss, that demonstrates even higher potential than before.
    One clear finding is the importance of enforcing physical constraints, especially energy conservation, in
QPINN training. For the vacuum case, adding a global energy conservation term is essential for a stable
training of the quantum model. This suggests that QPINNs can significantly benefit from additional physical
“guidance” beyond just raw PDE residuals.


                                                               18
    Regarding the quantum circuit ansatz, our ablation study yields several insights. In the vacuum case, the
best performing are ansätze based on mid-depth entangling layers - the Basic and Strongly Entangling Layers.
On the other hand, in the dielectric case, those ansätze perform worse than the rest. We do not claim a
monotonic relation between entanglement strength and accuracy. In the vacuum (with the energy-conservation
term), mid-depth entangling ansätze achieve the best L2 errors, whereas in the dielectric case, less-entangled
or differently connected variants perform better. We attribute this to problem- and loss-specific inductive
biases rather than entanglement per se.
    The effect of different input scales has a significant impact in the vacuum case, where all schemes are
substantially better than the PINN run except for the case with scaleπ. In case 2 with a dielectric medium,
as in the rest of the criteria compared, the input scaling has a more subtle effect, where only scaleasin (best)
and scalenone achieve better results than the PINN run. Following this behavior, we observe that: (a) the
ML model can overcome the input and measurement distribution problems as scalenone is the second best in
both cases. (b) The scaling is problem-specific, and the performance is better when it is coupled with the
correct model.
    Computationally, we observe a significant reduction in the number of learnable parameters in quantum
models, even when they outperform all classical models. Specifically, in the regular model, there is a19%
reduction in the QPINN’s case, and a decrease of33%compared to the extra layer setup. Moreover, if one
can tolerate a lower accuracy, the difference in lower epochs is far greater in favor of the QPINN runs.
    Developing solutions for large cases, such as those in this study, required us to optimize the simulator
using our own in-house developed quantum simulator, which was more than50times faster than the current
industry’s most common development packages, while reducing the memory needed by more than 6 times,
leveraging the tremendous power of GPU-based simulations.
    Another primary consideration is the parameter reduction scaling, although we were unable to run
significantly larger simulations due to computational limitations and therefore could not explore this aspect
more rigorously. In our 2D unsteady test cases (pulse in a box and dielectric medium), the variational circuits
achieved a parameter reduction of approximately19%(66,932-67,072 in the QPINN’s case, and 82,820 in the
PINN’s case) relative to classical baselines at comparable, and even lower, error levels. As mentioned, due
to computational limitations, we were unable to explore significantly deeper or wider circuits; however, we
confirmed consistent trends in the shallower configurations studied. Moreover, other works, such as Trahan
et al. [11], which have worked on significantly smaller cases, support similar findings. In their 1D Burger’s
equation test case with a similar architecture to our network architecture, they observed approximately58%
(1,456 in the QPINN’s case, and 3,441 in the classical case) parameter amount reduction. Still, it should be
noted that those are substantially smaller networks compared to the one used in this work.

6.2  Why might the quantum layer help?
Across our ablations, the hybrid model frequently converges faster and attains lower L2 errors than the purely
classical PINN while using fewer trainable parameters (Table1; Figs.6-9). We outline below severalplausible
mechanisms by which the parametrized quantum circuit (PQC) may contribute to these gains in our setting.
These mechanisms are consistent with our observations, but were not directly verified in this study.
      • Harmonic feature expansion aligned with wave physics:With single-qubit  Rx data encoding
          and Pauli-Z readout, PQC outputs are trigonometric polynomials in the encoded angles; different
          input scalings modulate this effective harmonic basis (see Fig.3and Subsec.2.3). This is theoretically
          expected: the measurement expectations produced by such encodings generate Fourier-like features
          whose span grows with depth [40, 30]. Because time-dependent Maxwell solutions contain rich
          oscillatory content and we enforce periodicity in space/time, placing a periodic, high-frequency
          basis late in the network can plausibly mitigate spectral bias and lower the depth/width needed to
          represent wavefields [20,19].
      • Multiplicative, high-order interactions via entanglement (in moderation):Entangling
          layers cause the measured observables to involve multi-qubit Pauli strings, which correspond to
          products of sines/cosines across the encoded coordinates. This yields multiplicative cross-terms (e.g.,
          in x, y, and t) akin to higher-order features that may compactly capture the coupled curl relations
          in the TEz system. Prior analyses relate an ansatz’s entangling capability and expressibility to the
          richness of such interactions [28, 40]. Our results suggest a “sweet spot”: mid-depth, moderately
          entangling ansätze perform best in vacuum, whereas the no-entanglement variant is competitive in
          the heterogeneous case (Figs.6-9), indicating that the optimal interaction order is problem- and
          loss-dependent rather than “more entanglement is always better”.
      • Alignment between learned periodic embeddings and late-stage quantum harmonics:
          The classical front-end already enforces strict spatial periodicity and a learned temporal periodicity


                                                                 19
         (Subsec2.2). The PQC then injects additional periodic (trigonometric) featuresnear the output,
          effectively refining the spectrum after the PDE-informed residuals have shaped lower-frequency
          structure. This division of labor, where classical layers capture the coarse structure and the quantum
          layer contributes targeted harmonic refinements, offers a plausible explanation for the faster loss
          decay we observe when the PQC is present.
    Scope and limitations.We emphasize that these points arehypothesesconsistent with our ablations and
with existing theory on encoding-induced expressivity and entangling capability [40, 28, 30]. We did not
directly measure the spectral content, interaction order, or effective model dimension; therefore, we do not
claim a definitive causal mechanism. In line with recent guidance on benchmarking quantum ML [32], we
view our evidence as suggestive rather than conclusive. Moreover, we do not claim that adding the PQC will
be beneficial for other test cases beyond those studied here; further research is needed to generalize these
findings.
    Suggested follow-ups.To validate the points above, future work could (a) quantify the frequency spectra of
the learned fields and of the PQC outputs over( x,y,t); (b) compare against a classical control that augments
the penultimate layer with an equal-size trigonometric basis; (c) use data-reuploading cycles in varying sizes
and measure changes in accuracy/parameter efficiency; (d) probe interaction order by ablating entanglement
patterns while keeping parameter counts fixed; and (e) monitor gradient norms/variances versus depth to
locate an expressivity-trainability sweet spot [35,41,42].

6.3  Conclusions and future work
We present a QPINN approach for solving two-dimensional Maxwell’s equations and analyze the effects of the
ansatz design, input scaling, and energy conservation enforcement. The study finds that under appropriate
physical constraints and architectural settings, QPINNs can achieve better accuracy with lower parameters
compared to classical PINNs. The enforcement of energy conservation is critical for physically consistent
solutions for the QPINN runs in the vacuum case, which would experience BH without it, highlighting that
domain knowledge can substantially enhance PINN training.
    We demonstrate how quantum machine learning can be leveraged to enhance and accelerate scientific
computing for field simulations. While our experiments were performed on a classical simulator, they lay
the groundwork for future tests on quantum hardware as it matures. Key directions for future research
include scaling up the problem size (both in finer resolution and 3D problems) to test whether QPINNs can
retain performance with fewer parameters than classical networks. Additionally, investigating more advanced
quantum circuit training techniques, such as quantum natural gradient or circuit-specific regularization, is
crucial to improve convergence. It would also be worthwhile to explore other physics-informed tasks, such
as inverse problems (e.g., identifying material properties from field observations), to see whether QPINNs
offer any advantage there. Another important direction for future work would be to incorporate noise into
the quantum circuits and investigate the impact of noise mitigation and error correction methodologies on
QPINNs.
    The reason the PINN runs don’t suffer from the BH phenomenon in the vacuum test case is still not fully
clear. Several assumptions were tested, including whether it occurs in the QPINNs but not in the PINNs
due to the different spread of outputs from the second-to-last layer (the quantum layer in QPINN runs and
tanh activation function in the PINN runs) right from initialization. It turns out that this isn’t the root
cause of BH, as even when similar spreads were used, the QPINN still suffered from BH, while the classical
didn’t. Therefore, another future work direction is to understand why this happens in the QPINN runs and
not in the PINNs. By understanding this, it may be possible to improve other aspects of both classical and
quantum networks.
    We present a quantum-enhanced physics-informed neural network (QPINN) that reduces L2 solution
error for Maxwell’s equations by up to19%relative to classical PINNs. Our model’s energy conservation
loss mitigates the “black hole” phenomenon, enabling stable training in high-dimensional spatiotemporal
domains. This work utilizes an in-house, GPU-accelerated framework implementation that delivers substantial
end-to-end training speedups, bringing high-dimensional electromagnetic simulations within practical reach
on existing hardware.

Author Contributions Statement

Z.C. wrote the main manuscript text, and collected all data, and developed the code for the model and the
quantum simulator based on a classical PINN code developed by G.S., H.C. and S.H.. H.C. reviewed the
manuscript several times and was a significant part of shaping and correcting it. S.F. and U.P. have jointly
supervised the work and reviewed the manuscript.


                                                                20
Data availability statement
Data sets and results generated during the current study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.
Code availability
The in-house developed quantum library,TorQ - Tensor Operations for Research in Quantum systems, used
for all simulations in this work, is available at:  https://github.com/zivchen9993/TorQ.git. Also, for
performance benchmarking against PennyLane’s simulators, an expansion is required, and can be found at:
https://github.com/zivchen9993/TorQ-bench.git.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Yigal Ilin for providing an early version of the quantum simulator code, and we are
grateful to the Israel Innovation Authority for funding this research. Z. C. and U. P. were supported by
the Israel Science Foundation (ISF), Grants n. 939/23 and 2691/23, German-Israeli Project Cooperation
(DIP) n. 2032991, Ollendorff-Minerva Center of the Technion n. 86160946, and the Helen Diller Quantum
Center at the Technion. 2033613. U. P. was also supported by Chaya Chair n. 8776026, and Planning and
Budgeting Committee of the Council for Higher Education of Israel (VATAT) Program for Quantum Science
and Technology through Grant n. 86636903.
References
 [1] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep
     learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential
     equations.Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
 [2] Sifan Wang, Shyam Sankaran, and Paris Perdikaris. Respecting causality for training physics-informed
     neural networks.Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 421:116813, 2024.
 [3] Juan Diego Toscano, Vivek Oommen, Alan John Varghese, Zongren Zou, Nazanin Ahmadi Daryakenari,
     Chenxi Wu, and George Em Karniadakis. From pinns to pikans: Recent advances in physics-informed
     machine learning.Machine Learning for Computational Science and Engineering, 1(1):1–43, 2025.
 [4] Yuyao Chen, Lu Lu, George Em Karniadakis, and Luca Dal Negro. Physics-informed neural networks
     for inverse problems in nano-optics and metamaterials.Optics express, 28(8):11618–11633, 2020.
 [5] Lei Yuan, Yi-Qing Ni, Xiang-Yun Deng, and Shuo Hao. A-pinn: Auxiliary physics informed neural
     networks for forward and inverse problems of nonlinear integro-differential equations.Journal of
     Computational Physics, 462:111260, 2022.
 [6] Majid Rasht-Behesht, Christian Huber, Khemraj Shukla, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed
     neural networks (pinns) for wave propagation and full waveform inversions.Journal of Geophysical
     Research: Solid Earth, 127(5):e2021JB023120, 2022.
 [7] Xiaowei Jin, Shengze Cai, Hui Li, and George Em Karniadakis. Nsfnets (navier-stokes flow nets): Physics-
     informed neural networks for the incompressible navier-stokes equations.Journal of Computational
     Physics, 426:109951, 2021.
 [8] Ehsan Haghighat, Maziar Raissi, Adrian Moure, Hector Gomez, and Ruben Juanes. A physics-informed
     deep learning framework for inversion and surrogate modeling in solid mechanics.Computer Methods in
     Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 379:113741, 2021.
 [9] Oameed Noakoasteen, Shu Wang, Zhen Peng, and Christos Christodoulou. Physics-informed deep neural
     networks for transient electromagnetic analysis.IEEE Open Journal of Antennas and Propagation,
     1:404–412, 2020.
[10] Giorgio Panichi, Sebastiano Corli, and Enrico Prati. Quantum physics-informed neural networks for
     multivariable partial differential equations.Physical Review Applied, 25(1):014001, 2026.
[11] Corey Trahan, Mark Loveland, and Samuel Dent. Quantum physics-informed neural networks.Entropy,
     26(8):649, 2024.


                                                               21
[12] Alexandr Sedykh, Maninadh Podapaka, Asel Sagingalieva, Karan Pinto, Markus Pflitsch, and Alexey
     Melnikov. Hybrid quantum physics-informed neural networks for simulating computational fluid dynamics
     in complex shapes.Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 5(2):025045, 2024.
[13] Shiyuan Piao, Hong Gu, Aina Wang, and Pan Qin. A domain-adaptive physics-informed neural network
     for inverse problems of maxwell’s equations in heterogeneous media.IEEE Antennas and Wireless
     Propagation Letters, 2024.
[14] Philipp Brendel, A. Rosskopf, and V. Medvedev. Physics-informed neural networks for quasi-static
     maxwell’s equations.Fraunhofer IISB Erlangen, 2022.
[15] Joowon Lim and Demetri Psaltis. Maxwellnet: Physics-driven deep neural network training based on
     maxwell’s equations.A Photonics, 7(1), 2022.
[16] Yi-Ru Zheng, Zheng-Yu Huang, Xiu-Zhen Gong, and Xue-Zhi Zheng. Implementation of maxwell’s
     equations solving algorithm based on pinn. In2024 IEEE International Conference on Computational
     Electromagnetics (ICCEM), pages 1–3. IEEE, 2024.
[17] Sami Barmada, Shayan Dodge, Mauro Tucci, Alessandro Formisano, Paolo Di Barba, and Maria Evelina
     Mognaschi. A novel hybrid boundary element–physics informed neural network method for numerical
     solutions in electromagnetics.IEEE Access, 2024.
[18] Gal G Shaviner, Hemanth Chandravamsi, Shimon Pisnoy, Ziv Chen, and Steven H Frankel. Pinns for
     solving unsteady maxwell’s equations: convergence issues and comparative assessment with compact
     schemes.Neural Computing and Applications, 37(29):24103–24122, 2025.
[19] Sifan Wang, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. On the eigenvector bias of fourier feature networks:
     From regression to solving multi-scale pdes with physics-informed neural networks.Computer Methods
     in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 384:113938, 2021.
[20] Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh
     Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn high
     frequency functions in low dimensional domains.Advances in neural information processing systems,
     33:7537–7547, 2020.
[21] Sifan Wang, Shyam Sankaran, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. An expert’s guide to training
     physics-informed neural networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08468, 2023.
[22] Sokratis J Anagnostopoulos, Juan Diego Toscano, Nikolaos Stergiopulos, and George Em Karniadakis.
     Residual-based attention in physics-informed neural networks.Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
     and Engineering, 421:116805, 2024.
[23] Aditi Krishnapriyan, Amir Gholami, Shandian Zhe, Robert Kirby, and Michael W Mahoney. Charac-
     terizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks.Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 34:26548–26560, 2021.
[24] Suchuan Dong and Naxian Ni. A method for representing periodic functions and enforcing exactly
     periodic boundary conditions with deep neural networks.Journal of Computational Physics, 435:110242,
     2021.
[25] Junyu Liu, Zexi Lin, and Liang Jiang. Laziness, barren plateau, and noises in machine learning.Machine
     Learning: Science and Technology, 5(1):015058, 2024.
[26] Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines.Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 20, 2007.
[27] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[28] Sukin Sim, Peter D Johnson, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Expressibility and entangling capability of
     parameterizedquantumcircuitsforhybridquantum-classicalalgorithms.Advanced Quantum Technologies,
     2(12):1900070, 2019.
[29] Maria Schuld, Alex Bocharov, Krysta M Svore, and Nathan Wiebe. Circuit-centric quantum classifiers.
     Physical Review A, 101(3):032308, 2020.
[30] Adrián Pérez-Salinas, Alba Cervera-Lierta, Elies Gil-Fuster, and José I Latorre. Data re-uploading for a
     universal quantum classifier.Quantum, 4:226, 2020.
[31] Jonathan Nemirovsky, Maya Chuchem, and Yotam Shapira. Efficient compilation of quantum circuits
     using multi-qubit gates.Quantum Science and Technology, 2025.


                                                               22
[32] Joseph Bowles, Shahnawaz Ahmed, and Maria Schuld.  Better than classical?  the subtle art of
     benchmarking quantum machine learning models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07059, 2024.
[33] Kosuke Mitarai, Makoto Negoro, Masahiro Kitagawa, and Keisuke Fujii. Quantum circuit learning.
     Physical Review A, 98(3):032309, 2018.
[34] Hao Zhongkai, Jiachen Yao, Chang Su, Hang Su, Ziao Wang, Fanzhi Lu, Zeyu Xia, Yichi Zhang,
     Songming Liu, Lu Lu, et al. Pinnacle: A comprehensive benchmark of physics-informed neural networks
     for solving pdes.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:76721–76774, 2024.
[35] Jarrod R McClean, Sergio Boixo, Vadim N Smelyanskiy, Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven. Barren
     plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes.Nature communications, 9(1):4812, 2018.
[36] Martín Larocca, Supanut Thanasilp, Samson Wang, Kunal Sharma, Jacob Biamonte, Patrick J. Coles,
     Lukasz Cincio, Jarrod R. McClean, Zoë Holmes, and M. Cerezo. Barren plateaus in variational quantum
     computing.Nat Rev Phys 7, 174–189 (2025), 2025.
[37] Stefan H Sack, Raimel A Medina, Alexios A Michailidis, Richard Kueng, and Maksym Serbyn. Avoiding
     barren plateaus using classical shadows.PRX Quantum, 3(2):020365, 2022.
[38] David A Meyer and Nolan R Wallach.  Global entanglement in multiparticle systems.Journal of
     Mathematical Physics, 43(9):4273–4278, 2002.
[39] Marco Cerezo, Akira Sone, Tyler Volkoff, Lukasz Cincio, and Patrick J Coles. Cost function dependent
     barren plateaus in shallow parametrized quantum circuits.Nature communications, 12(1):1791, 2021.
[40] Maria Schuld, Ryan Sweke, and Johannes Jakob Meyer. Effect of data encoding on the expressive power
     of variational quantum-machine-learning models.Physical Review A, 103(3):032430, 2021.
[41] Martin Larocca, Supanut Thanasilp, Samson Wang, Kunal Sharma, Jacob Biamonte, Patrick J Coles,
     Lukasz Cincio, Jarrod R McClean, Zoë Holmes, and Marco Cerezo. Barren plateaus in variational
     quantum computing.Nature Reviews Physics, pages 1–16, 2025.
[42] Su Yeon Chang and M Cerezo. A primer on quantum machine learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15969,
     2025.
[43] The quantum simulation library we created, TorQ - Tensor Operations for Research of Quantum systems,
     is available athttps://github.com/zivchen9993/TorQ.git.

































                                                              23
A  Asymmetrical pulse in vacuum
This asymmetrical test case is identical to the vacuum case, except for the initial condition that enforces
an asymmetrical solution. Also, as in the vacuum case, the boundary conditions are periodic. It was a test
case added to check if the solution’s behavior changes with respect to whether the energy conservation loss
(Eq.25) is added in an asymmetrical test case. Obviously, the symmetry loss (Eq.20) wasn’t used here.
For this test case, only the best performing QPINN runs in the vacuum case (Fig6b) - Strongly Entangling
Layers ansatz withscale    acos scaling method was chosen.
    According to the results in Fig.14, the same behavior as in the vacuum case is observed: the QPINN
runs without energy conservation loss experienced BH, but with it, the QPINN model outperformed both
PINN runs, with and without it. Also, the PINN run without the energy conservation loss achieved better
results than the one with.






















                                (a)                                                               (b)






















                               (c)                                                                 (d)
Figure 13: (a) Initial conditions (i.e. t = 0) for the asymmetrical pulse test case. The Gaussian pulse is
initialized at( x,y) = (0.4, 0.3)and stretched by(  σx,σy) = (0.85, 0.65). (b) Shows the contours of the electric
field Ez at the moment the wave’s propagation reaches the boundaries of the domain, where t = 0.5. (c)
Captures the propagation at time t = 0.8, in which waves from nearby domains reach the wave in the domain
simulated (the boundaries are periodic, one can view it as infinite tiles of the same domain tiled next to each
other). (d) Shows the final simulation time att= 1.5.





                                                                 24
                                                                 (a)





























                                                                 (b)
Figure 14: (a) Mean loss (log scale) for the runs made in this asymmetric test case, which was the best
combination for the vacuum case: Strongly Entangling Layers ansatz with scaleacos and energy loss included.
The semi-transparent band indicates the standard deviation. (b)L2 errors for the classical regular with energy
loss (dark yellow), without energy loss (light yellow), and the Strongly Entangling Layers ansätze, where only
the runs with energy conservation converged and the ones without are marked with “X”. The dashed yellow
line shows the classical result for the regular-depth network. The dash-dot line indicates the best run’s error
(highlighted by a gold star). An “X” denotes configurations where none of the 5 runs converged.






                                                                 25