           An ab initio foundation model of wavefunctions thataccurately describes chemical bond breaking



                 Adam Foster†,1,*  , Zeno Sch¨atzle†,1,2  , P. Bern´at Szab´o†,1,2  , Lixue Cheng†,1,a  , Jonas K¨ohler1,b,
                         Gino Cassella1,c, Nicholas Gao1,b, Jiawei Li1,d, Frank No´e1,2,*, Jan Hermann1,*

                                            †These authors contributed equally to this work.

                                  1Microsoft Research AI for Science        2Freie Universit¨at Berlin

                                    ∗Email:{adam.e.foster,franknoe,jan.hermann}@microsoft.com


           AbstractReliable description of bond breaking remains a major challenge for quantum chemistry due to the
           multireference character of the electronic structure in dissociating species.  Multireference methods in particular
           suffer from large computational cost, which under the normal paradigm has to be paid anew for each system at a
           full price, ignoring commonalities in electronic structure across molecules.  Quantum Monte Carlo with deep
           neural networks uniquely offers to exploit such commonalities by pretraining transferable wavefunction models,
           but all such attempts were so far limited in scope.  Here, we bring this paradigm to fruition with Orbformer,
           a transferable wavefunction model pretrained on 22,000 equilibrium and dissociating structures that can be
           fine-tuned on unseen molecules reaching an accuracy–cost ratio rivalling classical multireference methods.  On
           established benchmarks as well as more challenging bond dissociations and Diels–Alder reactions, Orbformer
           is the only method that consistently converges to chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol).  This work turns the idea
           of amortizing the cost of solving the Schr¨odinger equation over many molecules into a practical approach in
           quantum chemistry.



1  Introduction

A major impediment to predicting and optimizing the properties of molecules and materials in silico is the computational
cost of accurate electronic structure calculations.  Ab initio methods that explicitly represent the many-body electronic
wavefunction [1] are the most accurate, but also the most computationally demanding.  Further complicating the picture is
the dividing line between weakly and strongly correlated systems.  For some systems, e.g. most molecules close to their
equilibrium geometry, the electronic wavefunction is weakly correlated, allowing the use of ‘single-reference’ methods such as
coupled cluster [2] to compute the wavefunction to very high accuracy.  Yet the weakly correlated systems represent only an
island in the space of all chemistry and one whose exact boundary is not precisely known.  For strongly correlated systems,
there is no de facto standard wavefunction method, and calculations often require expert study and individual tuning for
each system.  Worse still, many multireference methods face a more unfavourable cost scaling than their single-reference
counterparts.  A scalable method for multireference calculations would therefore be of immense value, not only for making
direct predictions, but also for calibrating faster and more approximate methods to handle strongly correlated phenomena
such as many chemical reactions and much of transition-metal chemistry.
    Ab initio methods are called such because they do not use any information other than the first-principles electronic
Schr¨odinger  equation  and  a  choice  of  numerical  approximations.   But  they  can  also  be  characterized  by  each  single
calculation being done from scratch,  with no computation shared between calculations on similar molecules,  despite
chemistry owning much of its success to the recognition of recurring patterns in the electronic structure of molecules.  The
key insight is that these two qualities can be decoupled, and this can be used to drastically lower the cost of ab initio
methods.  A method derived exclusively from first principles can still share computation between similar molecules, not only
within simultaneous calculations but also over time, effectively storing and reusing recurring computation patterns.  One
might worry that the results could be then affected by the choice of such molecules, but this can be rendered moot if the
sharing affects only the rate at which the method arrives at a solution, not the solution itself.  It is this shift in paradigm
for ab initio methods that is the topic of this work.  This new paradigm is also not entirely without precedent—many
traditional methods are iterative in nature and use various initial guesses, but these never go beyond the most rudimentary
consideration of electronic structure and are typically built with heuristics rather than from first principles.  In contrast,
the kind of foundation model considered here is fully ab initio, has the same complexity as any final solution it yields,
and even before any computation is done on a new molecule, it already encodes its fully correlated electronic structure
at a semi-quantitative level.  Throughout this work, we use the term foundation model in the specific sense of a single

  aCurrent address:The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology                   bCurrent address:CuspAI                    cCurrent address:Imperial College
London      dCurrent address:Tsinghua University


                                                                           1
wavefunction model that is pretrained across a broad range of molecules and then serves as a reusable starting point that
is adapted to each new system by fine-tuning, rather than in the looser sense of an all-purpose model that is applied to
any task without further training.
    How can such foundation models be constructed?  This challenge has been picked up by a new entrant on the quantum
chemistry scene, deep quantum Monte Carlo [3] (deep QMC), which represents the wavefunction with a deep neural
network and trains it towards the ground state by the principle of energy minimization.  The earliest work in this field
for molecular systems [4,5] achieved essentially exact solutions on small molecules.  Various new network architectures
[6–10] and extensions [11–19] have since been proposed.  Successful applications to strongly correlated molecules have
been particularly encouraging [20].  Whilst the theoretical cost scaling of this approach with system size is favourable,
its large prefactor has prevented wider adoption for practical calculations.  But thanks to its reliance on deep neural
networks, deep QMC is ideally suited to profit from the new paradigm of computation sharing and cost amortization
between molecules.  Recent work has explored such new ideas by employing parameter sharing to capture common features
in the wavefunctions corresponding to different molecules and geometries [11,21–25], as well as pretraining a wavefunction
model on up to 700 molecular structures before fine-tuning [26–28].  However, we argue that a critical threshold of scale in
this endeavour has not yet been crossed.  Achieving practical generalization needs scale in the training throughput, size
and diversity of the molecular dataset covered, and an architecture that can properly make use of this training signal.
With a view to establishing deep QMC as a practical method, one must also take great care when comparing with existing
quantum chemistry methods.  We believe that the cost–accuracy trade-off must be assessed first and foremost, and that
deep QMC has the greatest potential to bring value to quantum chemistry in the area of multireference problems that are
challenging for established methods.
    In this work, we introduce Orbformer, a neural network wavefunction ansatz.  Orbformer operates across molecules
of different sizes, compositions, and geometries, but can attain or surpass the same energy accuracy as state-of-the-art
single-point ans¨atze [7].  Orbformer is designed to learn composable features that generalize over different molecules.
Modifications of the sampling and variational training procedures allow pretraining a model across 22,000 molecular
structures with high geometric and compositional diversity.  Orbformer achieves excellent agreement with experimental
results on transition states of a Diels–Alder reaction.  Compared to classical quantum chemistry methods including DFT,
NEVPT2, MRCI, and MRCC on five bond dissociation curves, Orbformer demonstrates favourable trade-off between
cost  and  accuracy,  has  a  built-in  indicator  of  uncertainty  in  the  form  of  the  variance  of  the  local  energies,  and  can
be systematically improved with more fine-tuning, whereas converging classical methods is not always straightforward.
Compared to earlier deep QMC approaches, our innovations reduce the cost to reach chemical accuracy by about two
orders of magnitude with respect to best single-point calculations, and result in Orbformer being more accurate and
benefiting more from pretraining with respect to earlier chemically transferable ans¨atze.  The model learns recognisable
features of electronic structure directly from the variational principle, such as the existence of exactly two localized ‘core’
orbitals per carbon atom, without these being hardcoded into the model architecture.  Orbformer, though by no means
the end of the story, marks significant progress towards a model that generalizes the electronic structure of molecules.
Given its favourable cost–accuracy trade-off for multireference problems, Orbformer is a useful tool for quantum chemistry
applications today.

2  Results

2.1Orbformer:  a foundation model for quantum chemistry
We introduce Orbformer, a chemically transferable wavefunction ansatz that simultaneously approximates solutions to the
electronic Schr¨odinger equation for a wide range of molecules.  The model accepts as inputs a molecular configuration,
M, and the spatial-spin co-ordinates of electrons,x.  TreatingMas an input to the wavefunction network, rather than a
parameter describing an optimization problem, is at the heart of our approach to sharing computation between similar
molecules, and is to the best of our knowledge an option unique to deep QMC [22,27].  Orbformer is constructed from a
Jastrow factor and a sum of generalized Slater determinants

                                                    Ψ(x|M) =e       J(x)  X    detAd(x|M)                                                                 (1)
                                                                           d
ensuring that, for everyM, the model as a function ofxis a valid anti-symmetric wavefunction.
    The major components of the Orbformer ansatz are:  an Electron Transformer, which processes electron features through
a sequence of attention layers; and the Orbital Generator, which dynamically creates generalized orbitals forM, each
consisting of an envelope and a projection of the electron representations (Fig.1left).  A guiding principle in the design of
the ansatz is locality—the interactions between any two particles are carefully crafted to decay with increasing distance
and the Orbital Generator is constrained to produce localized orbitals.  We show that this facilitates the re-use of orbitals
when similar chemical environments arise in different molecules.  Full details of our architecture are given in Sec.4.1.



                                                                          2
          Figure 1| Orbformer pretraining and fine-tuning. The Orbformer wavefunction takes nuclear positions and charges,M,
          and electron positions and spins,x, as inputs to generate generalized Slater matrices.  Linear combinations of these generalized
          Slater determinants, combined with an electron–electron Jastrow factor, give a chemically transferable wave function, Ψ, that can
          generalize across systems of varying size.  Orbformer is pretrained on a diverse dataset of small molecules and fragments, yielding a
          foundation model for non-equilibrium quantum chemistry.  To achieve accuracies of 1 kcal/mol, the pretrained Orbformer model is
          then jointly fine-tuned on a process-specific dataset.  Finally, the energy and other observables are evaluated for each of the involved
          molecular geometries.

                           Table 1|Phases of Orbformer chemical pretraining using the Light Atom Curriculum (LAC) dataset.







               We train the Orbformer wavefunction to minimize the expectation value of the Hamiltonian operator
                                                                                                " ˆHMΨ(x|M)         #
                                                               EM∼p        train(M),x∼|Ψ(x|M)|                               2Ψ(x|M),                                                         (2)

          where the expectation is taken over molecular configurations sampled from a training distribution and electron co-ordinates
          sampled from the unnormalized distribution defined by the current model.  This self-generative scheme does not require any
          external input data apart from the choice of molecular training distribution.  Our set-up generalizes standard variational
          Monte Carlo (VMC) by addition of an outer expectation over molecular configurations.
               Orbformer’s amortization of computational cost arises from the combination of chemical pretraining and transferable
          fine-tuning.  During pretraining, we present the model with an extremely diverse set of molecules and train variationally
          to encode the electronic structure of a swathe of chemical space to a semi-quantitative level.  We specifically created a
          pretraining dataset of 22,350 molecular configurations with up to 24 electrons composed of H, Li, B, C, N, O, F in various
          geometric configurations, as illustrated in Fig.1(centre).  This Light Atom Curriculum (LAC) dataset is specifically
          designed to involve multireference out-of-equilibrium geometries.  To maximize speed and improve stability, we pretrain in
          three phases of increasing size/complexity, as detailed in Table1.  We introduce innovations in the deep QMC training
          protocol to aid efficient, large-scale training, which we detail in Sec.4.  The same set of model parameters can be transferred
          from smaller to larger systems, and there is no baked-in maximum number of particles.  In this paper, our largest pretraining
          system had 24 electrons, whereas the largest fine-tuning system had 106 electrons.
               To attain high-accuracy wavefunctions, we start from the pretrained model, and fine-tune to convergence.  We do not
          resort to separate fine-tuning for every structure; instead, we group target structures together and fine-tune them using a
          single set of model parameters (Fig.1right).  For example, we routinely fine-tune all geometries with the same set of nuclei
          together.  The amortization from this approach can lead to a cost reduction proportional to the number of geometries, over
          and above the benefits of pretraining.

          2.2Diels–Alder reaction pathways
          We  compare  Orbformer  predictions  to  experimental  data  on  a  practically  relevant  chemical  problem.   The  task  of
          characterizing the mechanism of the iconic Diels–Alder reaction [34] (cycloaddition of ethene and butadiene) is chosen for

Phase    Data                                                                      StepsMbatch size    Electrons perMA100 hours (est.)3
    1a    LAC≤10 electrons, bend & stretch geometries     200k                       8                       1024                          320
    1b    LAC≤10 electrons, all geometries                         200k                       8                       1024                          320
      2    All LAC                                                                 400k                     16                       1024                        4000
Figure 2| Accuracy for activation and reaction energies of the iconic Diels–Alder reaction.Activation energies use
the transition state of the concerted pathway.  The experimental values are computed from the forward and backward activation
enthalpies measured by Rowley [29] and Uchiyama [30], respectively, applying zero-point and thermal corrections computed at
the B3LYP/6-31G** level [31].  The M06-2X and B2-PLYP density functional results are taken from the work of Cui et al. [32],
complete active space second order perturbation theory values are obtained from Scarborough [33] but are not published for the
reaction energy, while multireference coupled cluster results were computed by Lischka and coworkers [31], from where the molecular
geometries utilized for the Orbformer calculations are also taken.  The colour gradients represent results obtained with increasingly
large single-particle basis sets or QMC steps, as applicable.  The multireference coupled cluster results employed an active space
composed of six orbitals and six electrons, with two sets of configuration state functions:  a complete one, and a smaller one built by
applying the interacting space restriction from reference configurations with the same symmetry as the electronic state [31].


this purpose, as its exact mechanism was subject to debate until recently [32,33], and its accurate description requires
careful treatment of both static and dynamic correlation [31,33].
    Two major pathways have been identified along which the reaction might proceed:  a concerted one where the two
bonds between the reactants form synchronously, and a two-step mechanism involving biradical intermediates, where the
bonds form sequentially [32].  Using the concerted transition state, Orbformer converges to almost perfect agreement with
the experimental activation energy (Fig.2).  Chemical pretraining improves the convergence rate, despite the transition
state being well outside of the pretraining distribution at 46 electrons and involving the simultaneous breaking of two
bonds.  Of the traditional wavefunction based methods, only multireference coupled cluster achieves results agreeing with
experiment, but only if a small basis set or an artificially restricted set of configuration state functions are employed.  For
the two-step pathway, Orbformer predicts an activation energy that is about 9.9 kcal/mol higher than the experimentally
measured activation energy (see Supplementary NoteK.1for detailed results) clearly indicating that this is not the favoured
mechanism.  Our predicted energy difference between the two pathways is in good agreement with the current theoretical
and experimental consensus [30,32].  For the overall reaction energy, we also found that Orbformer reliably converges to
within 1 kcal/mol of the experimental value.  For this calculation, where strong correlation is expected to be less important,
classical methods fare better, but still exhibit a troubling sensitivity to the choice of basis set.
    These results show that Orbformer is a reliable and highly accurate method for dealing with transition state calculations
in realistic settings.  For additional benchmarking against experiments, we compared Orbformer predictions against an
experimental reference for N2 dissociation (Supplementary NoteK.2) and against experimental atomization energies of
small molecules (Supplementary NoteK.6).  In both cases, Orbformer matches extremely well with experimental references.



                                                                             4
Figure 3| Accuracy on minimum energy paths (MEPs) of five molecular dissociations.The colour and marker for
each method are the same across all panels (a)–(k) and are defined in the shared key.  Left column:  Reaction profile plotted as
mean-centered relative energy for (a) Ethane (b) Formamide and (c) 2-Aminopropan-2-ol.  The solid black line shows the reference
relative energies; the other two curves show the longest fine-tuned Orbformer prediction (Orbformer fine-tune LAC (400k)) and
the DF-MRCISD+Q(10,10)/aug-cc-pVDZ result.  Middle column:  Relative energy error of each structure in the corresponding
MEPs for (d) Ethane (e) Formamide and (f) 2-Aminopropan-2-ol.  Panels (a)–(f) together show how the mean absolute error in
relative energy is calculated across the reaction curve.  Right column:  Mean absolute error in relative energy for a wide range of
computational methods for (g) Ethane (h) Formamide (i) 1-Propanol (j) 2-Aminopropan-2-ol and (k) L-Alanine.  The circles in
blue/green colours with best fit lines represent results from different deep QMC variants.  Traditional electronic structure theories
are shown in orange with different marker symbols indicating the precise method used.  The dashed line indicates chemical accuracy
of 1 kcal/mol.  The shaded area represents an acceptable accuracy region of 5 kcal/mol.  For a method that does not run on a GPU,
we convert the computational cost using 1 GPU hour = 68.6 CPU core hours, computed from the power ratings of an A100 GPU
and an AMD EPYC 7763 CPU (cf. Supplementary NoteI.2).  Where a method uses multiple CPU cores or multiple GPU devices,
this is accounted for in the cost.


2.3Cost–accuracy trade-offs of high accuracy multireference calculations on bond breaking
For a more detailed examination of the cost–accuracy trade-off of Orbformer, we investigate relative energy errors at
20 points along a bond dissociation pathway in five different molecules with up to 48 electrons.  Fig.3(left column)
illustrates some of the chosen dissociations, which are intended to give good coverage of the strongly correlated intermediate
region.  For such detailed coverage of the potential energy surface, experimental references are not available.  Reference
energies for this experiment were therefore obtained from independent, single-point deep QMC calculations run at very
high cost to convergence, using a deliberately different and more expensive setup than the Orbformer calculations under
test.  We validated this protocol against an established single-reference benchmark by comparing the difference in energy
between the two dissociation endpoints (the subset of structures where single-reference methods are reliable) to literature
(RO)CBS-QB3 [35] dissociation energies.  We found that the dissociation energies from our reference QMC protocol matched
(RO)CBS-QB3 with a tolerance of 1 kcal/mol for all five dissociation curves (cf. Supplementary NoteI.2, Supplementary
Tables7and8for further details).  Throughout this section, accuracy is judged with respect to these reference energies.
    For each candidate method, we compute the relative energy error to the reference by removing any fixed offset between
the energy profiles, and calculating the mean absolute relative error (MARE, defined in Supplementary NoteH.3) across
all  geometries  (Fig.3middle  column).   Comparison  is  made  to  the  MRCISD,  MRAQCC,  NEVPT2,  and  CCSD(T)
wavefunction methods, and several DFT functionals as these all have reasonable software support to treat systems with
up to 48 electrons.  For the computational cost, we measure the machine hours consumed, and use the maximum power
ratings of the respective devices as our conversion factor between CPU and GPU hours.


                                                                           5
Figure 4| Convergence with respect to pretraining and fine-tuning.Mean absolute error in relative energy on the TinyMol
in-distribution (a) and out-of-distribution (b) test sets.  The error is computed with respect to reference energies obtained with
CCSD(T) extrapolated to the complete basis set limit [27].  Each data point in panels (a)–(d) is averaged over ten geometries of
three (in-distribution) or four (out-of-distribution) molecules; the error bars show the standard deviation across those molecules, and
the individual per-molecule values are overlaid as faint points.  The dotted horizontal line indicates chemical accuracy.  Panels (c) and
(d) compare the two pretraining datasets used for Orbformer and the impact of the length of the pretraining, at 800 fine-tune steps
per structure, on the in-distribution and out-of-distribution test sets, respectively.  The effect of the pretraining dataset composition
on the speed of fine-tuning on a new LiCN test set is shown on panel (e), where each point is averaged over five LiCN geometries,
the error bars show the standard deviation across those geometries, and the individual per-geometry values are overlaid as faint
points.  Note that Li is not present in the TinyMol pretraining dataset but is present in the LAC.


    It is apparent in each of Fig.3(g)–(k) that Orbformer fine-tuned from LAC pretraining is either on, or significantly
ahead of, the Pareto front formed by the set of orange points, i.e. from cheaper density functional methods and increasingly
costly complete active space-based wavefunction approaches.  Even more striking is the fact that Orbformer exhibits a
strict monotonic convergence with expended computational effort in all systems presented, while achieving systematic
convergence with traditional methods is often difficult or impossible, see e.g. Sec.2.2.  We therefore believe that Orbformer
represents the best available method for the modelling of strongly correlated molecular systems in dissociations of this
nature.
    The three Orbformer variants shown in Fig.3(g)–(k) isolate the improvements brought about from joint finetuning
and pretraining.  Optimizing the ansatz jointly across all geometries of a given minimum energy pathway (MEP) yields an
approximately 20× efficiency gain over independent, single-point optimization, amounting to almost perfect amortization
of cost over the 20 point dissociation curve.  On top of this, starting the joint fine-tuning from the Orbformer model
pretrained on the LAC dataset, one obtains additional gains in efficiency.  Here, we see that proximity to the pretraining
distribution is important, with about a 16× decrease in cost to reach chemical accuracy on ethane (in LAC dataset), a 6×
decrease on 1-propanol (somewhat larger than LAC). For L-Alanine (much larger than LAC), the pretrained model reaches
a 5 kcal/mol error 8× faster than its non-pretrained counterpart, but a 1 kcal/mol error only about 10% faster.  Thus,
pretraining is always beneficial, but decreases in importance with longer fine-tuning, as the network shifts to be more
specialized to the fine-tuning task.  Nevertheless, the benefits from pretraining on out-of-distribution molecules persist
down to chemical accuracy.
    Not shown here is training without our engineering improvements, which would be up to 2.6× slower across all Orbformer
variants (see Supplementary NoteK.3).  In totality, our approach recovers the results of independent, single-point deep
QMC reference calculations at a fraction of the cost and so brings deep QMC to the cost–accuracy Pareto frontier formed
by the range of classical methods that we have studied here.

2.4Comparison with existing deep QMC and the impact of pretraining
We now compare Orbformer to previous attempts at chemical transferability within the deep QMC framework [22,26,
27].  For this,  we employ the TinyMol dataset [27],  which has been used as a benchmark for medium scale chemical
transferability [22].  This is an easier dataset without strong correlation and features CCSD(T)/CBS reference energies.
The TinyMol benchmark comes with its own small pretraining dataset, while the test set is divided into in-distribution


                                                                            6
(different geometries of pretraining molecules) and out-of-distribution (molecules not present during pretraining).  In
addition to our main model pretrained from the LAC, we pretrained a separate Orbformer using the TinyMol pretraining
set.
    The obtained MAREs are compared to the results of Scherbela et al. [26], Gao et al. [22] and a single-point Psiformer [7]
baseline,  on  the  left  panel  of  Fig.4.   We  see  clearly  that  Orbformer,  pretrained  on  either  the  LAC  or  the  TinyMol
pretraining set, is the best performing model for both in- and out-of-distribution test sets.  On both test sets, the pretrained
Orbformer reaches chemical accuracy at least an order of magnitude faster compared to training from scratch.  The
single-point Psiformer is accurate but more costly because it does not exploit the joint fine-tuning methodology.  Compared
to the baseline of Scherbela, Gerard, and Grohs [27] we see improvement, both in terms of accuracy at each fine-tuning
iteration, as well as time to convergence to chemical accuracy.  Compared to Gao and G¨unnemann [22], we see that for
out-of-distribution test structures, their model is actually harmed by more pretraining, whereas Orbformer still benefits
from it.
    On the center panel of Fig.4, we see in addition that longer fine-tuning of Orbformer is beneficial, although the rate
of improvement slows beyond about 100k steps.  On the TinyMol test sets, pretraining using the TinyMol pretraining
dataset is clearly better than pretraining using the much larger LAC dataset.  We believe that this is because the TinyMol
pretraining distribution is much more aligned to the TinyMol test distributions.  To confirm this hypothesis, we created
an additional small test set of five geometries of LiCN undergoing bond stretching.  This molecule is in the pretraining
distribution of the LAC, is missing from Phase 1 LAC, while the TinyMol pretraining dataset doesn’t even contain the Li
species.  As seen on the right panel of Fig.4, LAC pretraining is now the most effective, followed by LAC Phase 1.  This
indicates, as expected, that molecules that are closer to the pretraining distribution can be fine-tuned faster, and is an
encouraging sign that scaling up pretraining datasets will result in improved coverage of chemical space.

2.5Inner workings of the Orbformer model
To analyze the properties of electronic structure learned by Orbformer, we fine-tune a single Orbformer model on a dataset
of systematically generated alkane chains with 6 to 13 carbon atoms (transferable fine-tuning).  Several orbital envelopes—
simple single-particle functions that control the spatial extent of Orbformer’s generalized orbitals—are illustrated in
Fig.5(c).  The first intriguing property we found was that, without direct supervision, Orbformer learns to assign exactly
two completely localized orbitals on every carbon atom, as seen in Fig.5(b).  It therefore appears that something akin
to core electron orbitals are learned by the model for the carbon species, directly from transferable application of the
variational principle.  We found that this orbital localization pattern actually emerges after as few as 10k Orbformer
pretraining steps.  When training from scratch, some localization does emerge, but not to the same degree as the model
fine-tuned from LAC pretraining.  This is not surprising, considering that for a single molecule, properties of the determinant
mean that there is no particular need for orbital localization, yet when attempting to generalize across similar molecules,
the property appears highly beneficial.  One may wonder whether orbital localization has the potential to harm performance
on conjugated systems.  In Supplementary NoteK.5we fine-tuned Orbformer on azulene–naphthalene isomerization and
showed that our reaction energy agrees very well with CCSD(T) at the complete basis set limit, indicating that the degree
of localization can be adapted to the electronic structure required and does not practically limit the network’s expressivity.
    Returning  to  our  systematic  investigation  of  alkanes,  we  further  investigate  the  extent  to  which  the  orbitals  are
transferable across molecules with the same local structure.  We extract the Slater matrices created by Orbformer for
octane in Fig.5(d), but also apply the same network to the smaller heptane molecule, using the octane electron positions
after removing enough electrons to maintain electric neutrality, shown in (e).  In Fig.5(f) we now compute the pointwise
difference between the octane Slater matrix in (d) and the heptane one in (e).  What we see is a striking confirmation of the
composability property of Orbformer.  Namely, for electrons close to the α-labelled carbon, which have essentially the same
local environment in both octane and heptane, we see that the corresponding rows of the Slater matrix are identical for
octane and heptane.  Electrons at the other end of the molecule see much larger variation in corresponding orbital values,
because their local environments are not the same.  This provides firm evidence that orbitals in Orbformer are re-used
between different molecules.  For an additional confirmation, panel (g) shows the gradient of the Slater matrix in (d) with
respect to the position of the rightmost electron (nearer the θ-labelled carbon).  It is clear that the Orbformer wavefunction
is primarily local, with the strongest gradient occurring for the orbitals and electrons nearest to the perturbation.  However,
it is evident that the model does selectively retain a few longer-range interactions.  Overall, the requirement of chemical
transferability forces the model to develop a theory of electronic structure in a way that is different from models that are
optimized anew for every structure.

3  Discussion

Orbformer  demonstrates  the  possibility  of  large-scale  amortization  of  computational  cost  in  high-accuracy  quantum
chemistry  through  pretraining  and  transferable  fine-tuning  of  a  neural  network  wavefunction  model.   We  saw  that
Orbformer is competitive with traditional wavefunction methods, not only because it is eventually more accurate, but


                                                                           7
Figure 5| Learning electronic structure patterns from data.Orbformer was fine-tuned on a dataset of alkanes with 6 to 13
carbons inclusive.  (a) Octane molecule with carbons labelled.  (b) Orbformer orbital envelopes for octane ordered by the nucleus on
which they are initialized:  first all carbons, then all hydrogens.  The localization score indicates whether a given orbital envelope
places all weight on a single nucleus.  The LAC pretrained and LAC pretrained 10k checkpoints were used as is on this molecule
with no fine-tuning.  (c) Isosurfaces of some of the envelopes shown above, here Orbital 34 has a localization score close to 1.0.
(d) One of the Orbformer Slater matrices for the octane molecule (using the LAC fine-tuned model), where we plot the pointwise
absolute value,|A d|, and white denotes 0.  The electrons are ordered by their x co-ordinate which approximately corresponds to
the order of the carbons from α to θ.  Orbitals are ordered exactly as in (b).  (e) Using the same Orbformer parameters, we now
compute the corresponding Slater matrix for the heptane molecule.  Electron positions and spins are the same as for octane but
with 8 electrons removed based on x co-ordinate.  (f) The pointwise absolute difference between the Slater matrices for heptane and
octane,|A d(·|oct )−A   d(·|hept )|.  The orbitals are arranged so that analogous orbitals that are initialized on the same nucleus in
both molecules appear in the same place.  Grey shading indicates electrons and orbitals which no longer exist in heptane.  White
colour denotes a difference of 0 and the scaling is the same as in (d).  (g) The absolute value of the gradient of the Slater matrix
presented in (d) with respect to thex-position of the rightmost electron.


because it can achieve a favourable cost–accuracy trade-off.  This is only possible because of a drastic reduction in the
per-structure computational cost brought about by learning to exploit recurring patterns in the electronic wavefunctions
for different molecules and geometries.
    For large-scale usage, we envisage Orbformer as a data generation method for a much cheaper model, such as a reactive
force-field applicable to multireference systems.  With deep QMC approaching the cost of traditional methods, it can
become a powerful and unique addition to the world of electronic structure.

4  Methods

4.1Orbformer wavefunction architecture
The  Orbformer  model  introduced  in  Sec.2.1is  a  chemically  transferable  ansatz,  meaning  it  accepts  the  molecular
configurationMas an explicit input, rather than as a parameter which defines a particular optimization problem.  A trained
Orbformer therefore represents the wavefunction for various molecules using a single set of neural network parameters.  The
architectural changes required to implement a chemically transferable ansatz of this form are substantial when compared
to single-molecule methods for molecular ground states with neural network ans¨atze [4,5].  In particular, a subnetwork
that treats the molecular configuration input, which in Orbformer is the Orbital Generator, is now required.  The basic
form of the Orbformer ansatz combines a scalar Jastrow factor,J θ, with a sum over generalized Slater determinants,

                                                Ψθ(x  1:E |M) =e    Jθ(x  1:E   )X    det[A   dθ(x  1:E |M)],                                                     (3)
                                                                                  d

                                                                              8
where each Adθ is an all-electron E×E       matrix.  In contrast to traditional Slater determinants built from single-particle
orbitals, these generalized Slater matrices contain permutation-equivariant many-body functions:  each row depends not
only  on  the  position  and  spin  of  a  single  electron  but  on  those  of  all  electrons.   The  permutation  equivariance  then
guarantees that Ψθ is antisymmetric under electron exchange.
    The Jastrow factorJ            θ enforces the electron–electron cusp conditions [36] and is given by

                                                   EX                                          EX
                          Jθ(x  1:E   ) =−   14            αpare−∥r     e−r   e′∥/α  par− 12            αantie−∥r     e−r   e′∥/α  anti,                          (4)
                                              e<e′,σe=σ   e′                              e<e′,σe̸=σ   e′

where αpar,αanti are learnable parameters, electrons are indexed by e = 1,...,E and σe denotes the spin of electron e.
This exponentially decaying form allows the functionJ                θ to become additive over well-separated subsystems.
    Each generalized Slater matrix is formed as a pointwise product Adθ = Ωdθ⊙ Φdθ of envelopes, Ω, and projected electron
representations, Φ.  The envelopes dictate the spatial extent of each orbital.  For each nuclear charge we associate a set of
learnable exponents ζZf  that define radially symmetric primitive envelopes Penf =e−ζ   Znf ∥r  e−R   n∥ on the electron–nuclei
distances; these are combined using coefficient matricesW    env,σdonf   that are an output of the Orbital Generator,

                                                                       NX  FenvX
                                                          (Ωdθ)eo =             PenfW env,σ  edonf .                                                                  (5)
                                                                      n=1  f=1
Here d, o, n and f  index determinants,  orbitals,  nuclei and feature dimensions,  respectively.  The projected electron
representations are obtained from the permutation-equivariant electron representations Tef  generated by the Electron
Transformer together with coefficient matricesW                 repr,σdof     from the Orbital Generator,

                                                                         FreprX
                                                             (Φdθ)eo =         TefW repr,σ      edof  .                                                                     (6)
                                                                         f=1
    The electron representations are generated from an Electron Transformer.  Our Electron Transformer network first pools
incoming signals from each nucleus to each electron, to create a starting electron representation.  These representations are
then passed through a number of self-attention layers with an attention bias term that is computed from the electron–
electron distances such that the attention logits decay to zero between very distant electrons.  Through the attention
mechanism, every electron representation depends on the positions and spins of every other electron, and the set of electron
representations is equivariant to a permutation of the electrons.  The former property means that Orbformer ‘orbitals’ are
a strict generalization of orbitals in classical quantum chemistry (which only depend on a single electron).  The latter
property ensures that the ansatz overall is antisymmetric under the exchange of two electrons, as required.  Orbformer is,
to our knowledge, the first model that successfully combines a transformer [37] architecture with generalization across
molecules.
    The Orbital Generator subnetwork allows Orbformer to model the wavefunction for multiple molecules simultaneously.
It produces the coefficient matrices W env,σdonf   and W repr,σdof     that are used to form Ω and Φ.  The Orbital Generator depends
only on the input molecular configuration,M, and not on the electron positions and spins,x.  The Orbital Generator
has two main stages:  (i) initialization, and (ii) message passing.  In the initialization stage, orbital representations are
instantiated that are completely localized to a single nucleus and depend only on the atom types that are present in the
molecule.  For example, in the LiH molecule, the network will initialize three distinct orbitals on the Li atom and one
orbital on the H atom.  Although crude, this scheme ensures that charges are locally balanced at initialization.  In the
message passing stage, a sequence of message passing layers update the orbital representations to respond to the overall
geometry of the molecule.  This allows the network to see the local structure of the molecule and to respond accordingly,
and it allows orbitals to delocalize away from their nucleus of initialization.
    The property of composability is a constraint that we apply to the network architecture to encourage the network
to learn generalizable features that can be re-used between different molecules that share similar sub-structure (e.g. a
functional group).  Composability guarantees size consistency for single-determinant Orbformer (but not when multiple
determinants are used).  Consider electrically neutral moleculesM                   1, M2 containing E1,E2 electrons respectively.  In the
limit of infinite distance betweenM       1, M2, a composable chemically transferable ansatz will have exactly E1  orbitals
localized toM    1  and E2  orbitals localized toM    2; the value of the orbitals localized toM    1  will be independent of the
nucleus and electron positions atM    2 and the same as would be obtained when running the ansatz onM     1 alone, and vice
versa; and the Jastrow factor for the combined system will be the sum of the Jastrow factors for the two separate systems.
In Supplementary NoteC.1, we show that composability means that the Slater matrices      Ad for the combined system of
M1,M 2 can be brought to a block diagonal form by a sequence of column and row swaps.
    Full details of the model architecture are given in Supplementary NoteC.3, and a detailed discussion of how Orbformer
relates to existing transferable QMC methods can be found in Supplementary NoteC.8.


                                                                             9
4.2Accelerating and stabilizing the model
Large-scale pretraining is only possible if the model is fast enough and stable enough to accommodate pretraining over a
large, diverse dataset.  We found that many of the ansatz changes introduced to satisfy the composability constraint actually
led to significant improvements in model stability as well.  In particular, ensuring that all particle–particle interactions
decay to zero in the large distance limit, and initializing the orbitals to be partially localized appears to have been very
beneficial for training stability.
    As a consequence of this, we found that we could train Orbformer at TensorFloat-32 [38] precision, a lower (hence
faster) precision than the full Float-32 precision used for all previous deep QMC optimizations.  We also found that we
could train with substantially smaller electron batch sizes than some previous work, for example we were able to train
Orbformer with batch sizes that were at least 4× smaller than electron batch sizes used for Psiformer [7].  We also found
that Orbformer behaved stably with very large distance separations (e.g. testing size consistency), unlike some other
existing models.
    To further accelerate the model, we adopted the Forward Laplacian framework that was introduced by Li et al. [16]
using the implementation in the folx package [39].  Another avenue of acceleration was to switch to using FlashAttention
[40] for the electron–electron attention layers.  FlashAttention both accelerates the attention layers and reduces their GPU
memory consumption.  Unfortunately, there is no existing FlashAttention algorithm for the Laplacian of the attention
layers.
    Rather than fall back on the default Laplacian, which is slower and more memory intensive, we introduce a FlashAttention-
inspired algorithm to compute the Forward Laplacian updates for the electron–electron attention layers.  We implemented
this using pallas [41], a kernel language for JAX. This kernel has now been made available in the      folx package.  The
precise details of our Laplacian implementation are given in Supplementary NoteF.2.

4.3Generating electron configurations for chemically transferable training
In single-molecule deep QMC training, the training data is generated from running Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
on the model itself and used to converge the ansatz towards the theoretical ground state wave function.  For Orbformer
pretraining, we sample molecular configurations from our LAC dataset and apply data augmentation.  This presents a
problem, however, as we must be able to sample electron configurations from the distribution|Ψ(x | M) |2 for a molecule
Mthat has not been previously encountered during pretraining.  This requires us to be able to burn in MCMC samplers
for new molecules much faster than in previous works.
    One natural MCMC algorithm for generating electron configuration data is Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm
(MALA) [42].  This combines a Langevin proposal of step-sizeτ
                                                                                               p
                                             x(prop,t+1)1:E             =x   (t)1:E   +τ    (t) ∇x1:E   log|Ψ       θ|+τ (t) ξ(t)                                                      (7)

with a Metropolis–Hastings accept/reject step.  However, we often observed that the step size τ  must become very small in
order to maintain a reasonable acceptance rate, leading to unacceptably slow burn-in.
    Taking our inspiration from the use of Langevin samplers in the generative modelling community, we propose an initial
sampling phase using Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) that simply omits the accept/reject step.  We combine
ULA with step size annealing, and find that this algorithm very rapidly converges electron samples close to the desired
distribution.  We then switch to MALA towards the end of equilibration to converge to exactly the right distribution.
Supplementary NoteDcontains an ablation study showing the much faster burn-in from using this ULA/MALA strategy.

4.4Multiple determinants
Unlike much prior work in deep QMC, we do not use Hartree–Fock as a starting point for our ansatz.  We found that
Hartree–Fock is unreliable for the multireference structures that we are interested in.  However, we noticed that training an
ansatz from random initialization led to worse performance, even in the limit of long training.  We were able to trace this
problem to ‘determinant collapse’—during early phases of training from random initialization, we saw that one determinant
rapidly came to dominate the model, leading to an effective single-determinant model that persisted to the end of training.
Indeed, we verified that the worse energy that was obtained without initializing to Hartree–Fock was the same energy that
was obtained from a single-determinant version of the model (whether or not Hartree–Fock initialization was used).
    To rectify this problem without the use of a Hartree–Fock baseline, we introduce a penalty term that is minimized
when all determinants contribute equally to the wavefunction value
                                                                    "X             det[A   d]     #
                                                 Ldet =−λ       detE      log    P                   .                                                         (8)
                                                                       d            d′ det[A   d′]

This penalty term can be directly backpropagated to compute the penalized training gradient.


                                                                          10
    Training with this penalty switched on, we discovered that starting from a randomly initialized network, we could
recover the performance that was obtained when starting from a network initialized to the Hartree–Fock solution.  Full
details of this ablation study are presented in Supplementary NoteE.3.

4.5Light Atom Curriculum
The Light Atom Curriculum (LAC) consists of molecules of up to 24 electrons containing the species H, Li, B, C, N, O and
F. We chose H, C, N, O and F as a basic set of atoms that define a rich space of organic chemistry.  We added Li and B to
cover molecules beyond organic chemistry whilst keeping to light atoms.  This choice of atoms allows us to convincingly
demonstrate that Orbformer can generalize across a large chemical space, whilst keeping the number of electrons low
enough to avoid spiralling computational cost in the pretraining.  We note that our pretrained Orbformer checkpoint is
only suitable for molecules containing these atomic species.  On the other hand, it is designed to generalize to systems
much larger than 24 electrons, as shown in our experiments.
    With  the  basic  set  of  molecules  defined,  we  sought  to  generate  a  more  diverse  set  of  geometries  than  previously
considered—moving away from equilibrium geometries to more distorted structures where electronic structure is more likely
to exhibit multireference character.  We created five distortion operations that could be randomly sampled without human
intervention:  bond bending, bond breaking, bond stretching, bond bending & stretching, and bond bending & breaking.
Additionally, we apply on-the-fly data augmentation to all our structures that consists of (i) random rotation, (ii) adding
small Gaussian noise to all atom co-ordinates.  We conducted analysis on the LAC to establish whether multireference
electronic structure is indeed likely to occur.  On a small subset of our dataset, we computed the commonly used T1,
D1  and|%TAE|       diagnostics[43]  using  CCSD(T)/cc-pVDZ.  We  found  that  between  20%  and  45%  of  structures  were
considered multireference by these diagnostics, with structures that feature bond breaking the most highly represented in
the multireference subset across all diagnostics.
    At pretraining time, we took a curriculum learning approach [44] that operated in three distinct phases, rather than
pretraining on the entire LAC from the start.  This approach enables us to pretrain efficiently by first learning features on
very small molecules, where gradient steps are cheapest, before moving on to somewhat larger molecules.  Thanks to our
model architecture, features that we learn on the smallest molecules generalize to much larger ones.  Indeed, whilst the
largest pretraining molecules have 24 electrons, we fine-tune the resulting model on much larger molecules (up to 106
electrons in this paper).  We also found that the curriculum learning approach improved pretraining stability.  Full details
of the curriculum learning are given in Supplementary NoteG.1and details on the dataset composition and multireference
diagnostics are presented in Supplementary NoteI.1.

Code availability
The code that supports this project and the model checkpoint that serves as a starting point for users’ calculations are
available athttps://github.com/microsoft/oneqmc[45].

References

   [1]E. Schr¨odinger. “An undulatory theory of the mechanics of atoms and molecules”. In:Physical review28.6 (1926), p. 1049.
   [2]    S. A. Kucharski and R. J. Bartlett. “Noniterative energy corrections through fifth-order to the coupled cluster singles and doubles
         method”. In:J. Chem. Phys.108.13 (Apr. 1998), pp. 5243–5254.issn: 0021-9606.doi:10.1063/1.475961.
   [3]    J. Hermann et al. “Ab initio quantum chemistry with neural-network wavefunctions”. In:Nat. Rev. Chem.7.10 (2023), pp. 692–709.
         doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570-023-00516-8.
   [4]    J. Hermann, Z. Sch¨atzle, and F. No´e. “Deep-neural-network solution of the electronic Schr¨odinger equation”. In:Nature Chemistry
         12.10 (2020), pp. 891–897.doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-020-0544-y.
   [5]    D. Pfau et al. “Ab initio solution of the many-electron Schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks”. In:Phys. Rev. Res.2 (3 Sept.
         2020), p. 033429.doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429.
   [6]    J. S. Spencer et al. “Better, Faster Fermionic Neural Networks”. In:arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2011.07125(2020). arXiv:                                      2011.07125
         [physics.comp-ph].url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.07125.
   [7]    I. von Glehn, J. S. Spencer, and D. Pfau. “A self-attention ansatz for ab-initio quantum chemistry”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13672
         (2022).
   [8]    L. Gerard et al. “Gold-standard solutions to the Schr¨odinger equation using deep learning: How much physics do we need?” In:Advances
         in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Koyejo et al. Vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., Nov. 2022, pp. 10282–10294.
   [9]    Z. Sch¨atzle et al. “DeepQMC: An open-source software suite for variational optimization of deep-learning molecular wave functions”. In:
         J. Chem. Phys.159.9 (Sept. 2023), p. 094108.issn: 0021-9606.doi:10.1063/5.0157512.
  [10]    J. Lin, G. Goldshlager, and L. Lin. “Explicitly antisymmetrized neural network layers for variational Monte Carlo simulation”. In:J.
         Comput. Phys.474 (Feb. 2023), p. 111765.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111765.
  [11]    N. Gao and S. G¨unnemann. “Ab-Initio Potential Energy Surfaces by Pairing GNNs with Neural Wave Functions”. In:arXiv preprint
         arXiv:2110.05064(2021). arXiv:2110.05064 [cs.LG].url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05064.
  [12]    X. Li et al. “Fermionic neural network with effective core potential”. In:Phys. Rev. Res.4 (1 Jan. 2022), p. 013021.doi:                               10.1103/
         PhysRevResearch.4.013021.
  [13]    M. Wilson et al. “Neural network ansatz for periodic wave functions and the homogeneous electron gas”. In:Physical Review B107.23
         (2023), p. 235139.


                                                                               11
[14]    G. Cassella et al. “Discovering quantum phase transitions with fermionic neural networks”. In:Physical Review Letters130.3 (2023),
       p. 036401.
[15]    J. Kim et al. “Neural-network quantum states for ultra-cold Fermi gases”. In:Commun. Phys.7.1 (May 2024), p. 148.doi:                              https:
       //doi.org/10.1038/s42005-024-01613-w.
[16]    R. Li et al. “A computational framework for neural network-based variational Monte Carlo with Forward Laplacian”. In:Nat. Mach.
       Intell.6.2 (2024), pp. 209–219.doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00794-x.
[17]    P. B. Szab´o et al. “An improved penalty-based excited-state variational Monte Carlo approach with deep-learning ansatzes”. In:Journal
       of Chemical Theory and Computation20.18 (2024), pp. 7922–7935.
[18]D. Pfau et al. “Accurate computation of quantum excited states with neural networks”. In:Science385.6711 (2024), eadn0137.
[19]    L. Cheng et al. “Highly accurate real-space electron densities with neural networks”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics162.3 (2025).
[20]    M. Scherbela et al. “Accurate Ab-initio Neural-network Solutions to Large-Scale Electronic Structure Problems”. In:arXiv preprint
       arXiv:2504.06087(Apr. 2025). arXiv:2504.06087 [physics].doi:                                                10.48550/arXiv.2504.06087.url:         http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06087
       (visited on 06/18/2025).
[21]    M. Scherbela et al. “Solving the electronic Schr¨odinger equation for multiple nuclear geometries with weight-sharing deep neural
       networks”. In:Nature Computational Science2.5 (May 1, 2022), pp. 331–341.issn: 2662-8457.doi:                                  10.1038/s43588-022-00228-x.url:
       https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00228-x.
[22]    N. Gao and S. G¨unnemann. “Generalizing neural wave functions”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2023,
       pp. 10708–10726.
[23]    N. Gao and S. G¨unnemann. “Neural Pfaffians: Solving Many Many-Electron Schr¨odinger Equations”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14762
       (2024).
[24]    Z. Sch¨atzle et al. “Ab-initio simulation of excited-state potential energy surfaces with transferable deep quantum Monte Carlo”. In:
       arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19847(2025).
[25]D. Linteau et al. “Universal neural wave functions for high-pressure hydrogen”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07062(2025).
[26]    M. Scherbela, L. Gerard, and P. Grohs. “Variational Monte Carlo on a Budget—Fine-tuning pre-trained Neural Wavefunctions”. In:
       Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems36 (2023), pp. 23902–23920.
[27]    M. Scherbela, L. Gerard, and P. Grohs. “Towards a transferable fermionic neural wavefunction for molecules”. In:Nat. Commun.15.1
       (2024), p. 120.
[28]R. Rende et al. “Foundation Neural-Network Quantum States”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09488(2025).
[29]    D. Rowley and H. Steiner. “Kinetics of diene reactions at high temperatures”. In:Discuss. Faraday Soc.10 (0 1951), pp. 198–213.doi:
       10.1039/DF9511000198.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/DF9511000198.
[30]    M. Uchiyama, T. Tomioka, and A. Amano. “Thermal decomposition of cyclohexene”. In:The  Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry68.7
       (1964), pp. 1878–1881.
[31]    H. Lischka, E. Ventura, and M. Dallos. “The Diels–Alder Reaction of Ethene and 1,3-Butadiene: An Extended Multireference ab initio
       Investigation”. In:ChemPhysChem5.9 (2004), pp. 1365–1371.issn: 1439-7641.doi:10.1002/cphc.200400104.
[32]    C.-X. Cui and Y.-J. Liu. “A thorough understanding of the Diels—Alder reaction of 1,3-butadiene and ethylene”. In:Journal of Physical
       Organic Chemistry27.8 (2014), pp. 652–660.issn: 1099-1395.doi:                                             10.1002/poc.3313.url:         https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
       abs/10.1002/poc.3313.
[33]    D. L. A. Scarborough et al. “Active space and basis set effects in CASPT2 models of the 1,3-butadiene-ethene cycloaddition and
       the 1,3-butadiene dimerization”. In:International Journal of Quantum Chemistry115.15 (2015), pp. 989–1001.issn: 1097-461X.doi:
       10.1002/qua.24933.
[34]    O. Diels and K. Alder. “Synthesen in der hydroaromatischen Reihe”. In:Justus Liebigs Annalen der Chemie460.1 (1928), pp. 98–122.
       issn: 1099-0690.doi:10.1002/jlac.19284600106.
[35]    V. K. Prasad et al. “BSE49, a diverse, high-quality benchmark dataset of separation energies of chemical bonds”. In:Scientific data8.1
       (2021), p. 300.
[36]    T.  Kato.  “On  the  eigenfunctions  of  many-particle  systems  in  quantum  mechanics”.  In:Commun.  Pure  Appl.  Math.10.2  (1957),
       pp. 151–177.doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/cpa.3160100201.
[37]A. Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762(2017).
[38]    P. Kharya.TensorFloat-32 in the A100 GPU Accelerates AI Training, HPC up to 20x. 2020.url:                          https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/
       tensorfloat-32-precision-format/(visited on 05/14/2020).
[39]N. Gao et al.folx - Forward Laplacian for JAX. Version 0.2.13. 2023.url:http://github.com/microsoft/folx.
[40]    T. Dao et al. “FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness”. In:Advances in Neural Information
       Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Koyejo et al. Vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 16344–16359.
[41]The JAX Team.Pallas: a JAX kernel language. 2023.url:https://docs.jax.dev/en/latest/pallas/index.html.
[42]    U. Grenander and M. I. Miller. “Representations of knowledge in complex systems”. In:Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
       B (Methodological)56.4 (1994), pp. 549–581.
[43]    W. Jiang, N. J. DeYonker, and A. K. Wilson. “Multireference character for 3d transition-metal-containing molecules”. In:Journal of
       chemical theory and computation8.2 (2012), pp. 460–468.
[44]    Y. Bengio et al. “Curriculum learning”. In:Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning. 2009, pp. 41–48.
[45]A. Foster et al.oneQMC Repository. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21160150. Software. 2026.
[46]W. M. Foulkes et al. “Quantum Monte Carlo simulations of solids”. In:Reviews of Modern Physics73.1 (2001), p. 33.
[47]    R. J. Needs et al. “Continuum variational and diffusion quantum Monte Carlo calculations”. In:Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
       22.2 (2009), p. 023201.
[48]    G. Carleo and M. Troyer. “Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks”. In:Science355.6325 (2017),
       pp. 602–606.
[49]J. A. Pople and D. L. Beveridge. “Molecular orbital theory”. In:C0., NY(1970).
[50]    D. A. Kleier et al. “Localized molecular orbitals for polyatomic molecules. I. A comparison of the Edmiston-Ruedenberg and Boys
       localization methods”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics61.10 (1974), pp. 3905–3919.
[51]T. Helgaker, P. Jorgensen, and J. Olsen.Molecular electronic-structure theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[52]P. Pulay. “Localizability of dynamic electron correlation”. In:Chemical physics letters100.2 (1983), pp. 151–154.
[53]    A. Nakata et al. “Large scale and linear scaling DFT with the CONQUEST code”. In:The Journal of chemical physics152.16 (2020).
[54]    P.  B.  Szab´o  et  al.  “Linear-scaling  local  natural  orbital  CCSD(T)  approach  for  open-shell  systems:  Algorithms,  benchmarks,  and
       large-scale applications”. In:Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation19.22 (2023), pp. 8166–8188.
[55]    M. Hanrath. “On the concepts of connectivity, separability, and consistency: An illustration by partitioned diagrams and numerical
       probing”. In:Chemical Physics356.1-3 (2009), pp. 31–38.


                                                                                    12
[56]    J. Bradbury et al.JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs. Version 0.3.13. 2018.url:                            http://github.com/jax-
       ml/jax.
[57]    C.-J. Huang, C. Filippi, and C. Umrigar. “Spin contamination in quantum Monte Carlo wave functions”. In:The Journal of chemical
       physics108.21 (1998), pp. 8838–8847.
[58]J. Lei Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. “Layer normalization”. In:ArXiv e-prints(2016), arXiv–1607.
[59]Q. Wang et al. “Learning deep transformer models for machine translation”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01787(2019).
[60]    C. Ying et al. “Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation?” In:Advances in neural information processing systems
       34 (2021), pp. 28877–28888.
[61]    J. Gilmer et al. “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry”. In:International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017,
       pp. 1263–1272.
[62]J. Gilmer et al. “Message passing neural networks”. In:Machine learning meets quantum physics(2020), pp. 199–214.
[63]    N. Metropolis et al. “Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics21.6 (1953),
       pp. 1087–1092.
[64]    Y. Song and S. Ermon. “Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution”. In:Advances in Neural Information
       Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach et al. Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[65]    G. O. Roberts and R. L. Tweedie. “Exponential convergence of Langevin distributions and their discrete approximations”. In:Bernoulli
       (1996).
[66]    G. O. Roberts and J. S. Rosenthal. “Optimal scaling of discrete approximations to Langevin diffusions”. In:Journal  of  the  Royal
       Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology)60.1 (1998), pp. 255–268.
[67]R. M. Neal. “Annealed importance sampling”. In:Statistics and computing11 (2001), pp. 125–139.
[68]    M. Welling and Y. W. Teh. “Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics”. In:Proceedings of the 28th international
       conference on machine learning (ICML-11). Citeseer. 2011, pp. 681–688.
[69]    J. Martens and R. Grosse. “Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curvature”. In:International conference
       on machine learning. PMLR. 2015, pp. 2408–2417.
[70]A. Botev and J. Martens.KFAC-JAX. Version 0.0.6. 2022.url:https://github.com/google-deepmind/kfac-jax.
[71]J. Clayden, N. Greeves, and S. Warren.Organic chemistry. Oxford university press, 2012.
[72]    U. Wietelmann and J. Klett. “200 years of lithium and 100 years of organolithium chemistry”. In:Zeitschrift f¨ur anorganische und
       allgemeine Chemie644.4 (2018), pp. 194–204.
[73]    R. J. Grams et al. “The rise of boron-containing compounds: advancements in synthesis, medicinal chemistry, and emerging pharmacology”.
       In:Chemical reviews124.5 (2024), pp. 2441–2511.
[74]    T. J. Lee and G. E. Scuseria. “Achieving chemical accuracy with coupled-cluster theory”. In:Quantum Mechanical Electronic Structure
       Calculations with Chemical Accuracy. Springer, 1995, pp. 47–108.
[75]    J. Parsons et al. “Practical conversion from torsion space to Cartesian space for in silico protein synthesis”. In:Journal of computational
       chemistry26.10 (2005), pp. 1063–1068.
[76]    W. R. Gilks and P. Wild. “Adaptive rejection sampling for Gibbs sampling”. In:Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C
       (Applied Statistics)41.2 (1992), pp. 337–348.
[77]    P. J. Huber. “Robust estimation of a location parameter”. In:Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution. Springer, 1992,
       pp. 492–518.
[78]    Q. Sun et al. “PySCF: the Python-based simulations of chemistry framework”. In:Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci.8.1 (2018),
       e1340.doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1340.
[79]    H. J´onsson, G. Mills, and K. W. Jacobsen. “Nudged elastic band method for finding minimum energy paths of transitions”. In:Classical
       and quantum dynamics in condensed phase simulations. World Scientific, 1998, pp. 385–404.
[80]    G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga, and H. J´onsson. “A climbing image nudged elastic band method for finding saddle points and minimum
       energy paths”. In:The Journal of chemical physics113.22 (2000), pp. 9901–9904.
[81]    E. L. Kolsbjerg, M. N. Groves, and B. Hammer. “An automated nudged elastic band method”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics
       145.9 (2016).
[82]    A. H. Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for working with atoms”. In:Journal of Physics: Condensed
       Matter29.27 (2017), p. 273002.
[83]    J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof. “Generalized gradient approximation made simple”. In:Physical review letters77.18 (1996),
       p. 3865.
[84]    F. Weigend and R. Ahlrichs. “Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple zeta valence and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn:
       Design and assessment of accuracy”. In:Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.7 (2005), p. 3297.doi:10.1039/b508541a.
[85]    S. Grimme et al. “A consistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94
       elements H-Pu”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics132.15 (2010).
[86]    S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich, and L. Goerigk. “Effect of the damping function in dispersion corrected density functional theory”. In:Journal
       of Computational Chemistry32.7 (2011), pp. 1456–1465.
[87]    F.  Neese.  “Software  update:  the  ORCA  program  system,  version  5.0”.  In:WIRES  Comput.  Molec.  Sci.12.1  (2022),  e1606.doi:
       10.1002/wcms.1606.
[88]    S. Smidstrup et al. “Improved initial guess for minimum energy path calculations”. In:The Journal of chemical physics140.21 (2014).
[89]E. Bitzek et al. “Structural relaxation made simple”. In:Physical review letters97.17 (2006), p. 170201.
[90]    R. J. Le Roy, Y. Huang, and C. Jary. “An accurate analytic potential function for ground-state N2 from a direct-potential-fit analysis
       of spectroscopic data”. In:The Journal of chemical physics125.16 (2006).
[91]    R. J. Gdanitz. “Accurately solving the electronic Schr¨odinger equation of atoms and molecules using explicitly correlated (r12-)MR-CI:
       the ground state potential energy curve of N2”. In:Chemical Physics Letters283.5 (1998), pp. 253–261.issn: 0009-2614.doi:                                                         https:
       //doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2614(97)01392-4.url:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0009261497013924.
[92]    M. S. Mirzaei, A. A. Taherpour, and C. Wentrup. “Azulene–Naphthalene, Naphthalene–Naphthalene, and Azulene–Azulene Rearrange-
       ments”. In:The Journal of Organic Chemistry87.17 (2022), pp. 11503–11518.doi:10.1021/acs.joc.2c01099.
[93]    J. M. L. Martin and G. de Oliveira. “Towards standard methods for benchmark quality ab initio thermochemistry—W1 and W2 theory”.
       In:The Journal of Chemical Physics111.5 (Aug. 1999), pp. 1843–1856.issn: 0021-9606.doi:10.1063/1.479454.
[94]    B. Ruscic et al. “Active Thermochemical Tables: thermochemistry for the 21st century”. In:Journal of Physics: Conference Series16.1
       (2005), p. 561.issn: 1742-6596.doi:10.1088/1742-6596/16/1/078.
[95]    A. Karton et al. “W4 theory for computational thermochemistry: In pursuit of confident sub-kJ/mol predictions”. In:The Journal of
       Chemical Physics125.14 (2006), p. 144108.issn: 0021-9606, 1089-7690.doi:10.1063/1.2348881.



                                                                                    13
  [96]    F. M. Bickelhaupt and E. J. Baerends. “Kohn-Sham density functional theory: predicting and understanding chemistry”. In:Reviews in
          computational chemistry(2000), pp. 1–86.
  [97]C. Roothaan. “Self-consistent field theory for open shells of electronic systems”. In:Reviews of modern physics32.2 (1960), p. 179.
  [98]    Q. Sun, J. Yang, and G. K.-L. Chan. “A general second order complete active space self-consistent-field solver for large-scale systems”.
          In:Chemical Physics Letters683 (2017), pp. 291–299.
  [99]    P. J. Knowles, C. Hampel, and H.-J. Werner. “Coupled Cluster Theory for High Spin Open Shell Reference Wavefunctions”. In:J.
          Chem. Phys.99 (1993), pp. 5219–5227.doi:10.1063/1.465990.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.465990.
 [100]    C. Angeli et al. “Introduction of n-electron valence states for multireference perturbation theory”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics
          114.23 (2001), pp. 10252–10264.
 [101]    P. G. Szalay et al. “Multiconfiguration self-consistent field and multireference configuration interaction methods and applications”. In:
          Chemical reviews112.1 (2012), pp. 108–181.
 [102]    R. A. Kendall, T. H. Dunning, and R. J. Harrison. “Electron Affinities of the First-row Atoms Revisited. Systematic Basis Sets and
          Wave Functions”. In:J.  Chem.  Phys.96.9 (May 1992), pp. 6796–6806.issn: 0021-9606, 1089-7690.doi:                                            10.1063/1.462569.url:
          http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.462569(visited on 06/14/2020).
 [103]    F. Neese and E. F. Valeev. “Revisiting the atomic natural orbital approach for basis sets: Robust systematic basis sets for explicitly
          correlated and conventional correlated ab initio methods?” In:Journal of chemical theory and computation7.1 (2011), pp. 33–43.
 [104]    A. D. Becke. “Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics98.7 (Apr.
          1993), pp. 5648–5652.issn: 0021-9606.doi:                                10.1063/1.464913. eprint:  https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/article-pdf/98/7/5648/
          19277469/5648\_1\_online.pdf.url:https://doi.org/10.1063/1.464913.
 [105]    S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk, and M. Nusair. “Accurate spin-dependent electron liquid correlation energies for local spin density calculations: a
          critical analysis”. In:Canadian Journal of physics58.8 (1980), pp. 1200–1211.
 [106]    C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr. “Development of the Colle-Salvetti correlation-energy formula into a functional of the electron
          density”. In:Physical review B37.2 (1988), p. 785.
 [107]    P. J. Stephens et al. “Ab initio calculation of vibrational absorption and circular dichroism spectra using density functional force fields”.
          In:The Journal of physical chemistry98.45 (1994), pp. 11623–11627.
 [108]    F. Weigend, F. Furche, and R. Ahlrichs. “Gaussian basis sets of quadruple zeta valence quality for atoms H–Kr”. In:The Journal of
          chemical physics119.24 (2003), pp. 12753–12762.
 [109]    S. Ehlert. “Simple DFT-D3: Library first implementation of the D3 dispersion correction”. In:Journal of Open Source Software9.103
          (2024), p. 7169.
 [110]    Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar. “The M06 suite of density functionals for main group thermochemistry, thermochemical kinetics, noncovalent
          interactions, excited states, and transition elements: two new functionals and systematic testing of four M06-class functionals and 12
          other functionals”. In:Theoretical chemistry accounts120 (2008), pp. 215–241.
 [111]    M. Cafiero. “Role of exact exchange and empirical dispersion in density functional theory-based three-body noncovalent interactions”.
          In:The Journal of Physical Chemistry A128.40 (2024), pp. 8777–8786.
 [112]    M. Cafiero. “Role of exact exchange and empirical dispersion in density functional theory-based three-body noncovalent interactions”.
          In:The Journal of Physical Chemistry A128.40 (2024), pp. 8777–8786.
 [113]    J.-D. Chai and M. Head-Gordon. “Long-range corrected hybrid density functionals with damped atom–atom dispersion corrections”. In:
          Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics10.44 (2008), pp. 6615–6620.
 [114]    N. Mardirossian and M. Head-Gordon. “ωB97X-V: A 10-parameter, range-separated hybrid, generalized gradient approximation density
          functional with nonlocal correlation, designed by a survival-of-the-fittest strategy”. In:Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics16.21
          (2014), pp. 9904–9924.
 [115]    J. D. Watts, J. Gauss, and R. J. Bartlett. “Coupled-cluster methods with noniterative triple excitations for restricted open-shell
          Hartree–Fock and other general single determinant reference functions. Energies and analytical gradients”. In:The Journal of chemical
          physics98.11 (1993), pp. 8718–8733.
 [116]    C. Angeli, R. Cimiraglia, and J.-P. Malrieu. “N-electron valence state perturbation theory: a fast implementation of the strongly
          contracted variant”. In:Chemical physics letters350.3-4 (2001), pp. 297–305.
 [117]    C. Angeli, R. Cimiraglia, and J.-P. Malrieu. “n-electron valence state perturbation theory: A spinless formulation and an efficient
          implementation of the strongly contracted and of the partially contracted variants”. In:The Journal of chemical physics117.20 (2002),
          pp. 9138–9153.
 [118]    P. J. Knowles and N. C. Handy. “A new determinant-based full configuration interaction method”. In:Chemical Physics Letters111.4-5
          (1984), pp. 315–321.
 [119]    J. Pipek and P. G. Mezey. “A fast intrinsic localization procedure applicable for ab initio and semiempirical linear combination of
          atomic orbital wave functions”. In:The Journal of Chemical Physics90.9 (1989), pp. 4916–4926.
 [120]    G. L. Stoychev, A. A. Auer, and F. Neese. “Automatic generation of auxiliary basis sets”. In:Journal of chemical theory and computation
          13.2 (2017), pp. 554–562.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank C. Bishop for his overall leadership of the AI for Science organization, P. Gori-Giorgi for numerous helpful discussions
about quantum chemistry, as well as M. Riechert, T. Vogels, and H. Schulz for invaluable support on GPU cluster management.

Funding statement

We acknowledge funding from Microsoft Research.

Author contributions statement

J.H. and F.N. conceived the project.  J.H., F.N. and A.F. managed the research.  A.F., Z.S., P.B.S., L.C., J.K., G.C., N.G. and J.L. developed
the JAX codebase, model architecture and training.  A.F., Z.S., P.B.S. and L.C. created the training data and ran the evaluations presented in
the paper.  A.F., Z.S., P.B.S., L.C. and J.H. wrote the paper.



                                                                                      14
          Supplementary Information

          A Glossary of mathematical symbols


                                                                                                  Symbol    Meaning
                                                                                                  W         Linear weight matrix
                                                                                                  T            Electron representations, shape [E,F    repr]
                                                                                                  φ           Featurization filter function
                                                                                                  β,γ        Featurization parameters
                                                                                                  κ            Attention distance bias weight
                                                                                                  Q          Orbital representations, shape [O,N,F     orb]
                                                                                                  η            Initial orbital representations
                                                                                                  τ             MCMC step size
                                                                                                  ξ             Standard Gaussian random variable∼N(0,1)
                                                                                                  B           Batch size
                                                                                                  V            Potential
                                                                                                  L           Loss
                                                                                                  πdet          Determinant relative probabilities
                                                                                                  λ            Regularization weight
                                                                                                  s             Standard deviation
                                                                                                  ℓδ             Huber loss function, by defaultδ= 1 Ha
                                                                                                  Q         Attention queries
                                                                                                  K          Attention keys
                                                                                                  V           Attention values
                                                                                                  B           Attention edge biases
                                                                                                  O          Attention outputs
                                                                                                  S           Attention intermediate inner products
                                                                                                  P          Attention weights



          B Background

          B.1Variational Monte Carlo (VMC)
          We  consider  a  molecular  system  comprising E  electrons  at  positionsr               1,..., rE  with  spins σ1,...,σE,  denoting  their
          spatial-spin coordinates (r e,σe) =x e, andN  nuclei at positionsR  1,..., RN  with chargesZ1,...,ZN, which we refer to as
          the molecular configuration (R  1:N ,Z1:N   ) =M.  If we make the Born–Oppenheimer approximation that the nuclei are
          fixed point charges, the stationary quantum states for the electrons satisfy the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation
           ˆH|Ψ⟩=E|Ψ⟩for the molecular Hamiltonian


                                                             NX   X         ZnZn′             NX   EX       Zn            EX  X           1
                                      ˆH:=−       12∇2r1:E   +          ∥R n−R n′∥−                    ∥R n−r e∥ +                  ∥r e−r e′∥                            (9)

                                                            n=1  n′<n                       n=1   e=1                    e=1  e′<e
          in atomic units.  Additionally,  as electrons are fermions,  electronic wave functions must be antisymmetric under the
          exchange of any two electrons.
               The ground state wave function is the eigenstate with the lowest eigenvalue.  In molecular variational Monte Carlo in
          first quantization, we propose an anti-symmetric, parametric, real-valued [46] wave function ansatz Ψ      θ(x  1, x2,..., xE)∈R  .
          The ground state can then be approximated by minimizing the Rayleigh quotient with respect to the parameterθ
                                                               ⟨Ψ  θ| ˆH|Ψ     θ⟩       Z |Ψ θ(x  1:E   )|  2ˆHΨ    θ(x  1:E   )
Symbol    Meaning                                 θ⋆ = minθ      ⟨Ψ  θ|Ψ θ⟩    = minθ         ⟨Ψ  θ|Ψ θ⟩      Ψθ(x  1:E   ) dx  1:E .                                        (10)
E          Number of electrons
N          Number of nucleiThe right-hand side of equation (10)      shows how this quotient can be approximated by Monte Carlo integration using
r            Electron spatial coordinatessamples from the distribution p(x  1:E   )∝|Ψθ(x  1:E   )|2.  This stochastic approximation lifts the requirements of analytical
σ            Electronz-axis spinintegrability, allowing VMC ans¨atze to explicitly model electronic correlation.
x           Electron spin-spatial coordinates, (r,σ)Traditional VMC uses ans¨atze built from Slater determinants of single-particle orbitals.  Explicit electron correlation is
R          Nucleus spatial coordinatestypically introduced by the inclusion of Jastrow factors, totally symmetric functions under the exchange of electrons, and
Z           Nucleus chargeback-flow transformations, totally symmetric displacements of the electron positions based on the remaining electrons [47].
M        Molecular configuration, (R      1:N ,Z1:N   )
ˆH          Hamiltonian
E            Energy                                                                       15
Ψ             Wave function
θ            Ansatz parameters
p(·)          Probability density
A          Slater matrix
Sz            Totalz-axis spin of electrons in a molecule
O          Number of orbitals
F           Number of features
H          Number of heads
J            Jastrow factor
α           Jastrow parameters
Ω             Envelope matrix
Φ             Projected electron representation matrix
ζ             Envelope exponent
P           Primitive envelopes, shape [E,N,F    env]
    More recently, neural network ans¨atze were proposed [48], including PauliNet [4] and FermiNet [5] as the first high-
accuracy solutions for molecular ground states via the ab-initio neural network approach.  Various new network architectures
and algorithmic improvements have since been proposed to further improve accuracy and efficiency [6–10,12,15,16,23].
    From the perspective of deep learning, three salient points of difference between training (fermionic) neural network
wave function ans¨atze and training standard neural networks are

   1.the network architecture must enforce the anti-symmetry constraint,

   2.  the training data isself-generated[3] using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to compute the loss         (10)     , so no
       external source of data beyond the equations of physics is required, and

   3.the loss function involves the Laplacian of the wave function with respect to the electron co-ordinates.

B.2Orbital localization and size consistency
In classical quantum chemistry, the termorbitalgenerally refers to a single-particle function        ψ(x e).  In the context of
molecular orbital theory [49], a localized orbital [50] is a single-particle orbital that is significantly different from zero only
whenr    e lies within a small region of space, e.g. close to a specific nucleus or between a pair of nuclei.  By default, most
classical quantum chemistry methods operate with non-localized orbitals that have support over the entire molecule [51].
However, exploiting the “nearsightedness of electronic matter”, localized orbitals have been employed to scale classical
quantum chemistry methods to very large systems [52–54].
    The termsize consistencygenerally refers to two non-interacting subsystems [55], such as two moleculesM                                                     1 andM       2
separated by a large distance.  A method is said to be size consistent if the energy is additive for these non-interacting
systems:E(M  1) +E(M  2) =E(M  1 +M   2).  Since the interaction terms in the molecular Hamiltonian (9)    tend to zero in the
large distance limit, size consistency will hold if the wave function can be expressed as a tensor product of non-interacting
wave functions of the subsystems|Ψ M1+M   2⟩ =|Ψ M1⟩⊗|Ψ M2⟩, which can be suitably antisymmetrized.  Perhaps the most
straightforward approach to constructing a size consistent ansatz is to employ a single Slater-determinant built from
orbitalslocalizedon either one of the two subsystems, with the correct number of orbitals assigned to each.  Then, if the
subsystems are sufficiently distant, the determinant will factorize into the above-mentioned tensor product form.  We pick
up on this thread in the next section when we discuss composability.

C Orbformer Architecture

C.1Basic principles and desiderata for a transferable ansatz
The original work on molecular ground states with neural network ans¨atze [4,5] trained a fresh network for each molecule
and each molecular geometry, soMwere treated as configuration parameters and not inputs to the network.  Given the
remarkable capacity of neural networks to generalize, it makes intuitive sense to attempt the construction of atransferable
ansatz, Ψ            θ(x  1:E | M), which takes the molecular configuration as an input.  However, the architectural changes required to
implement a truly transferable ansatz are significant.
    To discuss such issues in more detail, we introduce the basic form of the Orbformer wavefunction

                                               Ψθ(x  1:E |M) =e    Jθ(x  1:E   )X   det[A   dθ(x  1:E |M)].                                                   (11)
                                                                                d
In common with recent ans¨atze [4,5,7,22,27], Orbformer combines the sum of determinants of several all-electron        E×E
Slater matrices, Adθ, with a scalar Jastrow factor, Jθ.  In contrast to traditional Slater-determinants built from single
particle orbitals, these generalized Slater matrices contain permutation equivariant many body functions, composed of
orbital envelopes and a projected latent space encoding of electrons by deep neural networks.

Differently sized inputs.For a chemically transferable ansatz, not only do the values of inputsR                            1:N ,Z1:N    andx       1:E
change, but so do the number of those inputsE andN.  The network must therefore admit a variable number of inputs and
construct Slater matrices with variable sizes.  To build such a model that can be JAX-compiled [56], we take an approach
based on masking.  For a given compilation of the model, we first set maximum particle numbers Emax and Nmax.  Any
non-existent particles are masked out, with the model adapting different operations accordingly.  For example, the E×E
Slater matrices are promoted to Emax×E   max matrices, with non-existent electrons filled in with identity submatrices,
thereby preserving the determinant value.

Parameter dimensions.We further require that no parameter size depends on the number of electrons or nuclei, nor
on Emax or Nmax.  This is particularly beneficial when we train on a dataset of small molecules, setting Emax and Nmax
small to reduce computation time, but then transfer those parameters to a larger molecule.


                                                                            16
Nuclei permutations.Considering the molecular configuration as an explicit input to the neural network we design
the architecture to respect the molecular symmetries, i.e. permutations of the nuclei.  While not a strict necessity, the
permutation invariance helps with generalization, removing arbitrary indexing of nuclei.
    Orbformer is implemented in such a way that a permutation of the nuclei may, at worst, lead to an arbitrary permutation
of thecolumnsof       Adθ (the same permutation across all electrons and all determinants), leading to a physically unimportant
possible change of overall sign.

Composability.  We use the term composability to refer to a property that is related to, yet distinct from, the classical
concepts of orbital localization and size consistency (cf.  Supplementary NoteB.2).
    In Orbformer, single-particle orbitals are replaced with many-body orbitals, functions that depend on the positions of
all electrons, constructed so that the rows of each Slater matrix are equivariant to electron permutations via the formula
Ad,eθ  (x e,{ x\e}| M).  Extending the idea of orbital localization, a composable many-electron orbital with input (x   e,{ x\e})
should be non-zero only when an electronr       e  is found in a small region of space, and additionally the dependence of
its value on the positions of other electrons should decay as the distance between that electron,r       e, and other electrons
increases.  Note that, by construction, electrons are indistinguishable and in practice there is no assignment of specific
electrons to orbitals.
    Without being fully prescriptive, we add a constraint to guarantee size consistency for a single-determinant Orbformer.
If we consider two electrically neutral moleculesM                   1 andM       2 that are separated by a large distance, then we require E1
orbitals to be localized toM    1 and E2 orbitals to be localized toM    2 in the combined systemM             1 +M   2.  We also require
that the value of the orbitals localized toM    1 is independent of the nucleus and electron positions atM    2 and is the same as
would be obtained when running the ansatz onM     1 alone, andvice versa.  To see explicitly that this gives size consistency,
let us also assume that the first E1 electron samples are in the vicinity of moleculeM  1 whilst the latter E2 electrons are
near toM    2.  Then for a suitable ordering of the columns ofA  dθ for the combined system, we will have
                                                                                          A1     0
                                                    Adθ(x  1:E   1+E   2|M 1 +M   2) =      0 A  2                                                    (12)

where submatricesA1 andA2 should exactly match with what we would get if we evaluated Orbformer on either subsystem
with the appropriate subset of electron inputs, i.e. A1 =Adθ(x  1:E   1| M1) andA2 =Adθ(x E1+1:E      1+E   2| M2).  We also require
that the Jastrow factor must be additive

                                               Jθ(x  1:E   1+E   2) =J    θ(x  1:E+1     ) +J    θ(x E1+1:E      1+E   2).                                                   (13)

We stress that these result must hold for a single parameter θ for the transferable ansatz evaluated on differently sized
systems.  We also note that the block diagonal form (12)      depends on the arbitrary ordering of the orbitals and on the
ordering of the electrons, so column and row swaps may be required to arrive at the block diagonal form.
    This composability requirement gives size consistency for a single determinant model, because the determinant of the
block diagonal Slater, (12)     , is a product of the determinants of the submatrices A1 and A2 and the exponential of the
Jastrow factor, (13)     , is also a product, so that Ψθ decomposes into the product of wavefunction values for subsystemsM                     1
andM       2.  Row and column swaps lead, at worst, to an overall change of sign.  Hence for fixed set of model parameters,
single-determinant Orbformerissize consistent.
    Composability does not lead to size consistency for multi-determinant wavefunction models because the sum of products
is not equal to the product of sums.  We were not able to find a simple way to obtain zero-shot size consistency whilst using a
fixed number of determinants for differently sized systems.  To the best of our knowledge, traditional size consistent quantum
chemistry methods either use a single determinant (e.g.  Hartree–Fock), or use an exponential ansatz parametrization at
the cost of losing direct access to the wavefunction.
    Previous work on transferable deep QMC also discussed size consistency [22].  We note that the conclusions of Gao and
G¨unnemann [22] are similar to ours in the sense that size consistency is only guaranteed for a single determinant model
but they used a multi-determinant ansatz in practice.  Our approach to implementing localized orbitals differs from the
approach of Globe—rather than anchoring each orbital to a single spatial location, from which localization can be defined,
we allow our orbitals to spread across multiple nuclei; however, we limit the distance that messages can propagate to
maintain localization.  We also note that Gao and G¨unnemann [22] state all inter-particle interactions decay exponentially
in their model; however, by the inclusion of the Jastrow factor of Glehn, Spencer, and Pfau [7], this is not true, since

                                                   exp    −c   α2α+r    ∼1−c     α2α+r       asr→∞.                                                       (14)

An amended Jastrow similar to the one we use in Orbformer would be required to give an exponential decay rate.




                                                                            17
Figure 6|Orbformer overall architecture.Shape hints are written in terms of the maximum number of Nuclei, Electrons,
Orbitals and various Feature dimensions.  Determinant dimensions are not included on this diagram.  See Supplementary Figs.7
and8for detailed descriptions of the Electron Transformer, Orbital Generator and Nuclei MPNN subnetworks.  Cyan denotes
components of the network that do not depend on the electron inputs,x             1:E   .


Geometric invariances.Orbformer consumes only relative positions of particles, e.g.r           e−Rn, which grants us invariance
to an overall translation of the system.  We consciously choose not to incorporate any special (equivariant) treatment
of rotations into our ansatz.  While any observable of the molecule is indeed invariant under symmetry transformations
of the nuclei accord to Curies principle, the wavefunction itself, not being an observable but a mathematical construct,
cannot be treatedas invariant.  The ground state wavefunction of the boron atom serves as an illustrative example.  In this
system, the equation  ˆH|   Ψ⟩ =E|Ψ⟩ admits multiple, linearly independent solutions with the same ground state energy.
Each solution corresponds to a particular physical orientation of the angular momentum vector of the electronic state.
Thus, whilst the ensemble of all solutions is rotation invariant, training a network towards a specific solution requires us to
be able to break rotation symmetry.

Spin assignment. Orbformer is a spin-assigned ansatz [17,57], in which the      z component of the electron spins are fixed
for a given system throughout training.  For transferability, we further simplify to the case in which the number of up-
and down-spin electrons are equal (E even) or there is one more up-spin electron (E odd).  This latter simplification does
not prevent us from expressing wavefunctions with arbitrary total spins, as wavefunctions with Sz = 0 or 1 exist for all
possible total spin quantum numbers.

Limitation of our formulation.In our work, we treat the nuclear co-ordinates and charges as a complete description
of the molecule.  This means that we do not consider learning systems with an overall charge (ions), with a spin state
different from Sz = 0 or Sz =  12  (not a restriction on S2), and excited states.  None of these are fundamental limitations of
the ideas we present, but we leave them as topics for future work.

C.2Architecture overview

As discussed in Supplementary NoteC.1, the Slater matrices      Adθ haverowsA    d,eθ    that permute with the ordering of the
input electronsx                 1,..., xE, whilst the columns do not.  As a notational aid, we henceforth denote the shape of the Slater
matrices as E×O      , where O refers to ‘orbitals’ in a generalized sense.  Whilst it must be the case that O =E, this choice
of notation helps to separate electrons and orbitals logically.  The overall structure of Orbformer, using this notation and
for a single determinant, is shown in Fig6.

Jastrow factor.The Jastrow factor is given by

                                                   EX                                          EX
                          Jθ(x  1:E   ) =−   14            αpare−∥r     e−r   e′∥/α  par− 12           αantie−∥r     e−r   e′∥/α  anti                          (15)
                                              e<e′,σe=σ   e′                             e<e′,σe̸=σ   e′


                                                                            18
whereαpar,αanti are learnable parameters.  Like earlier works [4,7], this Jastrow factor ensures the correct electron–electron
cusps for the wavefunction [36].  Unlike earlier works, we use an exponentially decaying function as opposed to a harmonically
decaying one.  Whilst both forms of the Jastrow factor do satisfy the composability requirement (13)     , we found that the
exponential form was necessary for additivity of the Jastrow to also hold at finite distances where we would not expect an
appreciable interaction to occur (e.g. 12˚A).

Slater matrices.The matrices       Adθ are constructed as a pointwise product Adθ = Ωdθ⊙ Φdθ of envelopes, Ω, and projected
electron representations, Φ.

Envelopes.Our orbitals are a development of ‘simplified envelopes’ [23].  For each nuclear charge 1    ,...,Zmax we associate
a set of learnable exponents ζZ1:F   env.  The primitive envelopes are then formed as Penf =e−ζ   Znf ∥r  e−R   n∥.  As an output of
the Orbital Generator network, we obtain coefficient matrices W env,↑donf ,W env,↓donf  where d,o,n,f  index the Slater matrices,
orbitals, nuclei and primitive envelope features respectively.  We then form the envelopes as a contraction

                                                                         NX  FenvX
                                                           (Ωdθ)eo =              PenfW env,σ  edonf .                                                                (16)
                                                                        n=1  f=1
We explored making the exponents ζ the output of either the Orbital Generator or the Nuclei MPNN, but found that this
was prone to training instabilities.  We also apply a transform that ensures ζ > 0.1 throughout training.  Finally, we apply
an initialization scheme forζinspired by single electron wavefunctions for atomic systems
                                                     ζZf,init  = max(1,Z/f) forf= 1,...,F                          env.                                                        (17)

Projected electron representations.As an output of the Electron Transformer we have representations      Tef(x  1:E |
R1:N ,Z1:N   ) whereT  is constructed using a Transformer architecture [37] to be equivariant to permutations of the electrons,
andf= 1,...,F            repr.  From the Orbital Generator we obtain coefficient matricesW                 repr,↑dof  ,W repr,↓dof     and then form

                                                                           FreprX
                                                              (Φdθ)eo =         TefW repr,σ      edof  .                                                                   (18)
                                                                           f=1

C.3Electron Transformer
The structure of this subnetwork is shown in Supplementary Fig.7.  Our use of a self-attention mechanism for electron
representations is inspired by Psiformer [7], but with several innovations necessary to satisfy the requirements laid out in
Supplementary NoteC.1.

Electron–nucleus feature extraction.We use distance-dependent filter functions         φ(∥re− Rn∥) to weight electron–
nuclei interactions.  In contrast to Psiformer, which uses a logarithmic rescaling, we focus on filters such that φ(r)→ 0 as
r→∞  .  We found this made composability much easier to implement, because when summing signals from all nuclei we
are guaranteed that distant nuclei contribute very little.
    We use the following two families of filters

                                                                φexp(r|β) =βe   −βr ,                                                                          (19)

                                                            φsigmoid(r|γ) =                1γ(1 +e  r−γ    ),                                                                 (20)

and we selected non-learnable values β = 1, 3;γ = 2, 4 Bohr.  We found that it was important to incorporate filters that
extend to a reasonable distance before decaying, which was the motivation for our sigmoid filters.  We experimented with
learning the β  and γ  values, but found it was more unstable.  Importantly, our filters are non-zero at the origin with
non-zero gradient, and thus enable the network to correctly model the nuclear cusp in the same way as the Psiformer
features.
    For each pair (e,n), we then take the filter itself, along with the rescaled difference vector as features.  To facilitate
possible rotations based on the molecular geometry, we create matrices W rotn    as an output of the Nuclei MPNN of shape
6× 3 and incorporate the 6-dimensional ‘rotated’ features W rotn   (r e− Rn), suitably multiplied by our filter functions.  There
is no constraint for W rotn    to have orthonormal rows.  Features from different filters are stacked and then passed through a
linear layer.
    Separately, we create a spin–nucleus feature using the electron spin and nuclei features from the Nuclei MPNN for
every (e,n) pair, which are then passed through a single layer network.  This spin–nucleus feature is then multiplied by the
filter-based featurization of the vectorr  e−R n to give our overall electron–nucleus feature.


                                                                              19
Figure 7| Electron Transformer architecture.Shape hints are given as in Supplementary Fig.6, and H denotes the number of
heads.


Feature aggregation.The electron–nuclei features are summed over the nuclei axis to reduce them to electron feature
vectors.  The sum operation combined with distance-decaying featurization ensures composability.  The exact summation
procedure using multiple heads and LayerNorm [58] is shown in Supplementary Fig.7.

Electron transformer block.Here we only discuss the main differences between a standard Pre-LN transformer block
[59] and our block.  First, we incorporate an edge bias based on the distance [60] between electrons.  Denoting the distance
between two electrons asr  ee′ :=∥r   e−r e′∥and for attention headh, we include the bias

                                                     biasehe′ =−log   1 +e ree′−8 −|κ hree′|.                                                         (21)

The first term ensures an asymptotic decay rate∼e −r   ee′ , guaranteeing that no information flows between distant electrons,
which is essential for composability.  The second uses a learnable coefficient κh to control the distance bias of a given head
in the non-asymptotic region.  Thusκ  h can be seen as controlling how ‘myopic’ a given attention head is.
    Second, unlike in standard transformers, the output of the self-attention computation is multiplied by a receiver gate.
Given electron representations T (ℓ)ef   at layerℓ, we apply self-attention over the electron axis, giving T (ℓ,attn)ef        .  We also apply
a linear layer toT (ℓ)ef  to giveT (ℓ,gate)ef        .  The self-attention output is then reweighted by componentwise multiplication to give

                                                T (ℓ,gated attn)ef                =T    (ℓ,attn)ef  ⊙sigmoidT (ℓ,gate)ef.                                                    (22)

We found that this gating leads to improvements in transferability performance.  Our hypothesis is that the receiver
gate allows electrons that are very close to a nucleus to ignore incoming updates from other electrons.  Thirdly, we use a
simplified tanh-activated MLP as in Psiformer, but we combine it with Pre-LN. See the right-hand side of Supplementary
Fig.7for a complete description.

FlashAttention.We identified the attention layers as the most computationally demanding component of the entire
Orbformer network.  To accelerate the attention computations, we implement a variant of the FlashAttention algorithm
[40] that is suitable for our architecture.  We used      pallas [41] for the implementation.  Significantly, as well as acceleration
of the forward and backward passes, we also develop a FlashAttention-inspired implementation for the Laplacian, see
Supplementary NoteF.2for full details.




                                                                             20
Figure 8|Orbital Generator architecture.Shape hints are given as in Supplementary Figs.6and7.  The Message Passing
layers are completely parallel over the Orbital dimension.  The Nuclei MPNN is a simplified version of this subnetwork without the
orbital dimension.  In the Nuclei MPNN, initial features are simple embeddings of the nuclear charge, the third input (nuclei
features) in the Message Passing blocks is not present, and there are no separate spin-dependent representations formed at the end.

















                                                                               21
C.4Orbital Generator
The structure of the Orbital Generator is presented in Supplementary Fig.8.  At a high level, the tensors that propagate
through the Orbital Generator network have shape [O,N,Forb].  This means that each feature vector corresponds to an
orbital–nucleus pair.  The advantage of this approach is that it allows us to control the spatial extent of different orbitals
and enforce orbital localization.  This comes at the price of a relatively sparse orbital representation, particularly for larger
molecules.

Initial orbital embeddings.Under the assumption of a molecule with no overall charge, the number of electrons, and
hence the number of orbitals, must equal the sum of nuclear chargesPNn=1 Zn.  To featurize these orbitals, we use an
algorithm inspired by the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) approach.  Initially, the features of each orbital,
which are of shape [N,Forb], are zero for all but one nucleus.  We can therefore speak of an orbital being initialized ‘on’ a
certain nucleus.  Using the assumption of electric neutrality, we initialize exactly Zn orbitals on nucleus n.  Furthermore,
we use a set of initial orbital embeddings that are determined solely by the atom type.  This is accomplished through a set
of learnable initial feature vectors ηZi   with Z = 1,...,Zmax defining the atom type, and i = 1,...,Z  indexing that atom
type’s initial orbital embeddings.
    Given an arbitrary ordering for the nuclei, we assign the first Z1 orbitals to the first atom, the following Z2 orbitals to
the second, etc.  Supposing the oth orbital is initially assigned as the ith orbital of the nth atom, it’s initial embedding of
shape [N,F orb] will be                                                         
                                                                                   n= 1,...,N,
                                                                                   i= 1,...,Z  n,
                                            Q(0)on′f =   ηZni                      o=i+  Pn−1m=1 Zm,                                                 (23)
                                                               fδnn′  where     
                                                                                   n′ = 1,...,N,
                                                                                   f= 1,...,F    orb
where δ is the Kronecker delta, encoding the atom to which the given orbital is assigned and setting coefficients to zero on
all other nuclei.
    We note that the ordering of the orbitals depends on the ordering of the nuclei.  It is this indeterminate ordering that
gives rise to the possible permutation of the columns of the Slater matrices Adθ  that was discussed in Supplementary
NoteC.1‘Nuclei permutations’.
    Orbitals do not remain localized to a specific nucleus after initialization, instead we allow interaction through a sequence
of message passing layers.  These layers allow the fixed initial embeddings to slowly adapt to the overall molecular geometry.
The message passing layers operate in parallel over the orbital dimension with information exchanged between different
nuclei.  We tried some limited experiments incorporating orbital–orbital interaction, but we did not find that it improved
performance.  Message passing steps on the nuclei axis utilize nucleus–nucleus edge features, which we now describe.

Nucleus–nucleus feature extraction.We re-use the filter-based featurization approach that was used for the electron–
nuclei features in Supplementary NoteC.3.  Specifically, we compute filters      φ(∥RN− RN ′∥) using the exponential and
sigmoid functions in (19)      and (20)     .  For the nuclei, we use non-learnable filter hyperparameters β = 1;γ = 2, 4, 6 Bohr.
We set self-edges to 0.  As with the electrons, we concatenate the filter itself with the rescaled difference vectors .We
then concatenate over the different filter functions.  We do not use the rotated features that were used in the Electron
Transformer.

Orbital LayerNormSince orbital representations are presumed to be sparse, applying standard LayerNorm in parallel
over the orbitals and nuclei axes is not appropriate.  Instead, we apply mean-centering as usual, and then rescale features
using the maximum variance across nuclei within a given orbital
                                                                                                   −1/2
                                                                               ForbX          2
                                          Q(ℓ,LN)onf     =Q   (ℓ)onfmaxn′   1Forb  Q(ℓ)on′f    +ϵ          .                                             (24)

                                                                               f=1

All references to LayerNorm in Supplementary Fig.8refer to this variant.  Similarly, all linear layers have no bias unless
otherwise specified, to retain sparsity.

Message passing block.We use a Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN)[61,62] to exchange information using the
set of nucleiM, in parallel over different orbitals.
    Our message passing layer is designed so that the message between nuclei n and n′ on orbital o tends to zero if either

    •the distance∥R         n−R n′∥is large, or


                                                                           22
    •the input features for bothnandn     ′ are zero on that orbital.

These restrictions mean that orbital information ‘propagates outward’ from the initial single nucleus centre of a certain
orbital.  To implement this concretely, we define the messageM       o,n→n                 ′  as the pointwise product of three terms
   1.a linear function of the nuclei–nuclei edge features which decay to zero in the large-distance limit,

   2.a linear function of the current representations of the receiver and sender with a tanh activation,
       tanh    W senderQ(ℓ)on +W    receiverQ(ℓ)on′ , which will be zero if both receiver and sender are zero, and

   3.  a linear function of nuclei embeddings for the receiver and sender nuclei (derived from the Nuclei MPNN), with a
       sigmoid activation.

Messages are split into multiple heads and summed across the sender dimension.  Additionally, we use the same tanh-
activated MLP layer with Pre-LN as we use in the Electron Transformer.  Note that this gives a zero update when the
input is zero, as required.

Orbital-dependent coefficientsAs a final step of the Orbital Generator, we apply two different gating layers to
produce separate representations for up- and down-spin electrons, denoted Qσonf  whereσ =↑,↓   .  The orbital representations
are fed back into the main ansatz by extracting envelope coefficientsW env,σdonf   and electron representation coefficientsW repr,σdof    .
We form W env,σdonf   by applying linear layers to Qσonf; we use different layers for the two spins, and for each determinant.
For W repr,σdof    , we first sum Qσonf  over the nuclei axis, and then apply a linear layer, with multiple layers for spins and
determinants as before.
    We found that with standard training from a random initialization, a single determinant rapidly dominates the others,
leading to an effective single-determinant wavefunction.  To partially mitigate this, we design an initialization scheme so
that W env,σdonf   and W repr,σdof     are (almost) equal for different determinants d at initialization.  We defer a full discussion of this
issue to Supplementary NoteE.3.

C.5Nuclei MPNN
The Nuclei MPNN uses the same architecture as the Orbital Generator, but without the presence of the orbital axis.
The initial representations are simple embeddings of atom types.  We use standard LayerNorm because sparsity is not
a requirement for this network.  The Message Passing blocks use only two inputs:  current nuclei representations and
nucleus–nucleus edge features.  The final nuclei representations are returned after the last Message Passing block.  With
these simplifications, we see that our Nuclei MPNN is similar to a standard MPNN for molecular graphs.
    The matrices W rotn    that are fed from the Nuclei MPNN into the Electron Transformer are simple linear projections of
the final nuclei representations.  In the Orbital Transformer, the nuclei representations are fed directly into each Message
Passing layer as seen in Supplementary Fig.8.

C.6Single molecule mode
The  three  points  of  exchange  between  the  nuclei-only  parts  of  the  network  and  the  electron-dependent  part  of  the
network are:  the nuclei representations, the envelope coefficients W env,σdonf   and the electron representation linear weights
W repr,σdof    .  When training or fine-tuning Orbformer on a single molecule, it is possible to make these tensors simple, trainable
parameters.  Thus, the Orbital Generator and Nuclei MPNN are simply used to generateinitializationsfor these parameters,
and these subnetworks can then be discarded.  We found that this results in more memory efficient single-point fine-tuning,
but that the number of gradient steps required to converge could be larger than when fine-tuning the entire network on a
single molecule.  This mode was only used to generate single-point reference deep QMC energies for the ethane, formamide,
1-propanol, 2-aminopropan-2-ol, and L-alanine dissociation curves presented in the main text.  Single molecule mode is not
suitable for training on multiple molecules simultaneously.

C.7Table of architecture hyperparameters
Architecture settings are shown in Supplementary Table3.

C.8Relation to existing transferable QMC methods
Orbformer builds on recent deep QMC work that has explored the possibility of transferability across molecules by taking
the molecular configuration as input [11,26], most notably Gao and G¨unnemann [22] and Scherbela, Gerard, and Grohs
[27].  Here we summarize how the design of Orbformer relates to, and differs from, these existing efforts.



                                                                          23
                             Table 3|Dimensions and parameter values used for the Orbformer architecture.

                            Component                    Parameter                                                            Value
                            Electron Transformer    Attention heads                                                           8
                                                            Featurization heads                                                   16
                                                            Feature dimension (concat over heads),F repr         256
                                                            Attention layers                                                          4
                                                            Featurization filters                                                     4
                                                            Initial electron–nuclei feature dimension,F                     init          40
                            Orbital Generator          Message passing heads                                                4
                                                            Feature dimension (concat over heads),F              orb          128
                                                            Message passing layers                                                3
                            Nuclei MPNN                Message passing heads                                                2
                                                            Feature dimension (concat over heads),F              nuc            64
                                                            Message passing layers                                                3
                            Envelopes                      Exponents per nucleus,F             env                                       8
                            Determinants                 Number of determinants                                           16


Orbital construction.Comparing to the Globe model [22], our orbital construction does not hardcode core, valence
or bonding orbitals and avoids any discontinuities or jumps in the orbital representations.  Thus, when we discuss ‘core’
orbitals in Sec.2.5of the main text, these are an emergent phenomenon rather than an architectural design choice.  We
achieve this by allowing a single atom type to define multiple initial orbitals, and relying on the message passing layers to
identify ‘bonding’ orbitals if and when they exist.  Our approach avoids assumptions that are associated with closed shell
molecules, enabling us to better deal with bond dissociations.  Comparing to Scherbela, Gerard, and Grohs [27], we do not
use Hartree–Fock when setting orbital initializations.  This allows our network greater flexibility and avoids entangling
our orbital generation with any problems of Hartree–Fock in multireference settings.  Our message passing algorithm also
differs from all previous work in its specifics, such as the normalization layers and the formation of messages as a product
of three terms (cf.  Supplementary NoteC.4).

Composability and size consistency.  Our approach to constructing localized orbitals is similar to Gao and G¨unnemann
[22], who showed that the block diagonal form of a Slater matrix,      (12)     , can be achieved using localization constraints.
We prefer the term ‘composability’ to emphasize the fact that these constraints do not lead to size consistency in the
multi-determinant case.  We note some slight differences between the two formulations in Supplementary NoteC.1.

D Sampling

D.1Self-generating electron configuration data for transferable training
One of the most promising aspects of single-molecule VMC training is that training data is generated from the model
itself and used to converge the ansatz towards the theoretical ground state wave function, as discussed in Supplementary
NoteB.1.  This property of VMC marks a major departure from statistical learning paradigms that currently predominate
in machine learning for natural science.
    Here, we consider extending the self-generative training procedure of VMC to train our transferable Orbformer ansatz
across a region of chemical space.  Specifically, we consider transferable training in which moleculesMare sampled from a
training distribution, ptrain.  The capability to train against an arbitrary training distribution allows us to contemplate
using very large datasets of molecular structures with data augmentation.  This is a significant change from previous work
where Scherbelaet al.[26] using a dataset of 700 molecular structures was the largest molecular dataset yet considered in
the field, to the best of our knowledge.
    In order to train on a dataset of unlimited size, we must find a way to self-generate training data for new, unseen
molecules.  That is, we must be able to samplex   1:E ∼|Ψθ(x  1:E | M) |2 for a moleculeMthat has not been previously
encountered during training.  Previous work [27] side-stepped this problem by maintaining separate MCMC samplers for
each training molecule in their training dataset, but this solution does not scale.

Multiple optimizer steps.The naive solution to this problem is to burn in new MCMC walkers from scratch at each
training step.  However, with the standard MCMC sampling approaches, the number of steps required to reach equilibrium
is large and becomes even larger as molecule size increases.  As a first step to reduce the cost of re-equilibration, we fix the
training moleculesMfor multiple optimization steps, allowing us to re-use MCMC walkers that have already burned in by
running only a few additional MCMC steps between optimizer steps on the same molecules.


                                                                              24
Faster burn-in with Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm.Previous work has used either Metroplis–Hastings [63] with
Gaussian proposals or Metroplis–Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) [42] to sample electron configurations.  MALA
combines a Langevin proposal with step-sizeτ
                                                                                                  p
                                              x(prop,t+1)1:E             =x   (t)1:E   +τ    (t) ∇x1:E   log|Ψ       θ|+τ (t) ξ(t)                                                     (25)
with a Metropolis–Hastings accept/reject step.
    When using MALA, we observed that the step size τ  must become very small in order to maintain a reasonable
acceptance rate.  Sample rejection also tends to slow down mixing.  A large number of steps are therefore required to reach
the equilibrium distribution.
    In other fields of machine learning, Langevin sampling has seen remarkable success, for example, in the field of diffusion
models [64].  These applications use Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) [65,66], i.e. they do not apply an accept/reject
step.  In the transferable VMC context, we therefore propose an initial sampling phase using ULA with step size annealing
[67, 68]  to  get  close  to  the  correct  distribution.   We  switch  to  MALA  towards  the  end  of  sampling  to  reach  perfect
equilibrium, and we use MALA exclusively when updating samplers between multiple optimization steps on the same
molecules.  The benefits of this strategy are illustrated in Supplementary NoteD.2.

Improved Langevin sampler.We made several other modifications to the standard algorithm.  First, we apply norm
clipping to the gradient term in (25)     .  Second, we modify the gradients when electron samples are very near to nuclei to
prevent electron samples passing ‘through’ a nucleus.  Third, we observed that it is possible for some MCMC chains to get
stuck in low probability regions.  This is common in partially dissociated molecules, where the probability of having charges
imbalanced between the dissociated fragments becomes low as the wave function is trained.  Our solution to this problem
is to simply remove walkers with very low log|     Ψθ| values and replace them with a uniform sample from the surviving
walkers.  Given log|     Ψθ| values L(b)    for a batch b = 1,...,B, we let L(med) denote the median value over the batch andPB
L(spread) =  1B     b=1 |L (med)−L   (b) |.  We prune the walkers whereL             (b)  <L(med)−4L      (spread).

Electron configuration sampling for fine-tuningWhen fine-tuning on single molecules or reaction curves, we use
Metropolis–Hastings and we maintain separate MCMC chains for each molecule.

D.2Details of ablation study comparing ULA and MALA sampling
For this study, we used a randomly initialized Orbformer network in single-molecule mode on the benzene molecule in its
equilibrium geometry.  When running ULA, we annealed the step size from 0.15 to 0.005 using a geometric scheduler.  We
clipped the gradient norm to a maximum of 5.  As can be seen on Supplementary Fig.9, a pure MALA sampler begins with
a small step size and makes slow progress by first moving samples to a high probability region and then diffusing outwards.
Initial ULA sampling very rapidly moves samples near to equilibrium, with MALA completing the equilibration.

E Variational Training

E.1The local energy
Where single-molecule VMC training approaches a ground state wave function by minimizing the energy, we train our
transferable ansatz to jointly represent the ground state wave function for an entire class of molecules by minimizing the
expected value of the energy over the training distribution of molecules.  Following Supplementary NoteB.1, this expected
energy can be written as a nested expectation
                                                            Lenergy =E[E        loc (x  1:E ,M)]                                                                    (26)
where the expectation involves sampling moleculesM     ∼p   train and then sampling electron configurations conditional on
those moleculesx  1:E ∼|Ψ θ(x  1:E |M)|        2 using the technique outlined in Supplementary NoteD. The local energy is

                                                        Eloc (x  1:E ,M) =       ˆHΨ    θ(x  1:E |M)Ψθ(x  1:E |M)   ,                                                              (27)

which can be rewritten more explicitly using (9) as
                                           Eloc (x  1:E ,M) =−        1∇2r1:E  Ψθ(x  1:E |M)
                                                                   2     Ψθ(x  1:E |M)          +V(x        1:E ,M)                                               (28)
where∇2 is the Laplacian operator and V  is the Coulomb potential.  Whilst evaluating the potential given samples is
fast, the computation of the Laplacian of the network Ψθ with respect to the electron coordinate inputs is a significant
computational bottleneck.  Our efforts to improve the efficiency of the Laplacian computation are discussed in Supplementary
NoteFin detail.


                                                                            25
Figure 9|Illustrating the benefits of initial ULA sampling.We ran Langevin sampling with 512 parallel chains on a
randomly initialized Orbformer wave function for the benzene molecule at equilibrium geometry.  We ran standard MALA for 400
steps with a target acceptance of 57%, and we separately ran 150 steps of ULA followed by 250 steps of MALA. Distance units are
Bohr (a.u.).













                                                                            26
E.2Energy gradient computation
To compute the gradient of the energy expectation value it is common to employ the “gradient trick”.  Utilizing the
hermiticity of the Hamiltonian, the naive gradient of the energy is replaced with an unbiased estimator that involves at
most second derivatives (instead of third derivatives arising due to taking the derivative of the kinetic energy operator
with respect to the ansatz parameters).  For completeness we provide the derivation of the energy gradient
                                                         R Ψθ ˆHΨ    θ
                                      ∇θ⟨ ˆH⟩=∇         θ  R|Ψ θ|2                                                                                                        (29)
                                                     R∇θΨθ ˆHΨ    θ        R Ψθ ˆHΨ    θ R∇θΨ2θ
                                                 =       R|Ψ θ|2  −         R|Ψ θ|2      R|Ψ θ|2                                                                    (30)
                                                     R Ψθ ˆH(∇      θΨθ) + (∇  θΨθ) ˆHΨ    θ            R 2Ψθ(∇  θΨθ)
                                                 =                  R|Ψ θ|2     −⟨ ˆH⟩                      R|Ψ θ|2                                              (31)

                                                              ˆHΨ    θ
                                                 = 2R Ψθ       Ψθ  (∇  θΨθ)−2EΨ(∇               θΨθ)R|Ψ θ|2                                                                                         (32)


                                                 = 2R Ψ2θ( ˆHΨ    θΨθ −E)∇    θ log ΨθR|Ψ θ|2                                                                                               (33)
                                                           h Eloc−E∇θ log Ψθi
                                                 = 2E  Ψ2θ                               ,                                                                             (34)

where  3→  4  utilizes  the  hermiticity  of  the  Hamiltonian   ˆH,  4→  5  adopts  the  equality∇θ log Ψ  = ∇θΨΨ    and  5→  6
introduces the local energyEloc = HΨ    θΨθ  .  For better readability we use Ψθ as shorthand for Ψθ(x  1:E | M) and integrals are
taken over the full domain of the wave function.
    The generalization of the energy gradient to the transferable setting is straightforward.  With the loss function being an
expectation over contributions of molecular configurationsM, the gradient becomes
                                                                          h                                             i
                                      ∇θEM⟨ ˆHM⟩= 2E    MEr∼Ψ     2θ          EMloc−EM ∇θ log Ψθ(x  1:E |M)               ,                                      (35)

where  ˆHM refers to the Hamiltonian implementing the nuclear potential of the moleculeM,     EM is the corresponding
energy expectation value,EMloc is the local energy for that molecular configuration and the wave function is a function of (a
varying number of) electrons with a parametric dependence on the molecular configuration.

E.3Multiple determinants
Departing from almost all existing work in the area [4,7,22,23,27], we do not pretrain Orbformer towards a Hartree–Fock
wave function.  We found that the Hartree–Fock solution can be very far from the correct wave function for molecules that
are not near to their equilibrium geometry (e.g. bond breaking).  Creating a Hartree–Fock pretraining mechanisms for a
transferable ansatz is also significantly more burdensome than using it for single molecule training.
    However, when training from a random initialization, we encountered the problem that a single determinant rapidly
comes to dominate the wave function, leading to an effective single determinant model.  To overcome this, we first initialize
all determinants to be equal as outlined in Supplementary NoteC.4, but we found that this alone was not sufficient to
prevent determinant collapse.  The relative weighting of determinants can be described by the probability distribution

                                                                  πdet,d     =     det[A   dθ]P
                                                                                 d′ det[A   d′θ ].                                                                       (36)
To encourage all determinants to play a role in the wave function, we introduced the following regularization term to the
training objective                                                       "X                               #

                                                     Ldet =−λ       detE        logπ      det,d    (x  1:E |M)                                              (37)
                                                                             d
where the expectation is with respect to the training data, as in (26)     .  This regularization term is minimized when all
determinants contribute equally to the wave function.  Its gradient can be computed directly by automatic differentiation.
    Surprisingly, we discovered thatwithout Hartree–Fock pretrainingbut using this multi-determinant penalty and an
equal-determinant initialization we could obtain the same energy as was obtained when using Psiformer with Hartree–Fock
pretraining.



                                                                               27
Figure 10| Determinant collapse.We study the connection between Hartree–Fock pretraining and determinant collapse on the
CH4 molecule at equilibrium geometry.  We compare standard Psiformer training to variants with a single determinant or without
Hartree–Fock (HF) pretraining.  Orbformer is trained from scratch without Hartree–Fock but uses our multi-determinant penalty
and initialization.


E.4Ablation study on determinant collapse and Hartree–Fock pretraining
For this study, we trained from scratch on the CH4 molecule.  We used an electron batch size of 4096 split across 4 GPUs.
When Hartree–Fock pretraining was used,  we ran 20k steps using the same settings as outlined in the original work
introducing the Psiformer architecture [7].  When the multi-determinant penalty was applied, we used the regularization
weight λdet  = 0.001.  In Supplementary Fig.10,  we see that training Psiformer without Hartree–Fock pretraining is
equivalent to training a single determinant model (with or without pretraining).  It appears, therefore, that the benefit
of Hartree–Fock pretraining has little to do with the quality of Hartree–Fock itself, but arises simply from preventing
determinant collapse.

E.5Optimization with K-FAC
The ansatz parameters θ  are updated to minimize the combined lossLenergy +Ldet  using the K-FAC optimizer [69]
implemented in the kfac-jax package [70].  Computing the gradient of  Lenergy with respect to θ is analogous to the single
molecule case as shown in Supplementary NoteE.2.  We explored several alternatives to K-FAC but were unable to find
one that matched its stability and speed of training.
    We also apply clipping to the local energies, as this has shown itself to be essential in earlier VMC work with neural
networks [4,5,7].  We apply clipping separately to local energies from different molecules.  Furthermore, for multi-molecule
training, we observe that local energies may be in very different scales for different molecules.  During chemical pretraining,
we therefore reweight the local energies in a similar manner to Globe [22] by computing the molecule-conditional local
energy standard deviation, s(M), and rescaling the local energies for that molecule by       min(2, 1/s(M)); additionally we
scale up the gradient ofL    det by a factor ofs(M).

E.6Tables of settings
Training settings are shown in Supplementary Table4.

F Efficient wavefunction Laplacians

The widespread success of foundation models is due in large part to the outstanding computational efficiency with which
they  can  be  trained  on  increasingly  larger  datasets.   For  chemically  transferable  VMC  to  even  approach  the  scaling
behaviour of foundation models, reducing the compute time required to evaluate the Laplacian is essential.

F.1Computing the Laplacian in a single forward pass
The Forward Laplacian framework is a new approach to computing the Laplacian of a neural network which can result
in VMC training that is significantly faster than a naive implementation [16].  The essential principle of the Forward



                                                                         28
                              Table 4|Hyperparameter values used for the Orbformer training and sampling.

                                    Component                      Parameter                                        Value
                                    Local energy                    Clipping width                                    5.0
                                    Multi-determinant loss    Regularization weightλ  det               0.001
                                    Optimizer (K-FAC)         Damping                                          0.001
                                                                      Learning rate                                     0.05
                                                                      Norm constraint                               0.001
                                    Sampling                          ULA steps at re-equilibration             150
                                                                      ULA initial step size                          0.15
                                                                      ULA final step size                          0.005
                                                                      MALA steps at re-equilibration          150
                                                                      MALA target acceptance rate           57%
                                                                      Decorrelation steps                               60
                                                                      Langevin gradient norm clipping         5.0
                                                                      Pruning width                                     4.0


Laplacian is encapsulated in a chain rule for the Laplacian

                                                              ∂2v           ∂2u           ∂2v  ∂u
                                                              ∂x2  = ∂v∂u   ∂x2 + ∂u∂x    ∂u2  ∂x.                                                                  (38)
where v =v(u(x)).  The Forward Laplacian framework propagates the value, gradient and Laplacian forwards through
the computational graph of a neural network.  For further details,  see Li et al. [16].  We use the Forward Laplacian
implementation in thefolxpackage [39].

F.2Forward Laplacian of edge-biased attention
For most layers of Orbformer, we were able to rely on standard Forward Laplacian update rules implemented in  folx.
However, we early on identified the electron–electron attention layers (cf. Supplementary NoteC.3) as some of the most
demanding computations in our model.  Our use of a variant of FlashAttention [40] accelerated the forward and backward
passes through the attention layers.  However, no existing FlashAttention implementation exists for the Laplacian.
    We therefore introduce a FlashAttention-inspired algorithm that computes the forward Laplacian update rule of the
attention layers.  This was possible by making use of the pallas kernel language in JAX [41].  The resulting kernel evaluates
the Laplacian update rule for multi-head attention significantly faster than a na¨ıve Forward Laplacian implementation
applied to an un-optimized attention layer.  Our kernel is publicly accessible in the folx package, while full details of the
update rule are given in the following.
    We parallelize all computations over the batch and head dimensions of the attention computation, distributing these
to separate streaming multiprocessors.  Here, we therefore deal only with the attention algorithm for a single head and
without any batch dimensions.

F.2.1Forward pass
We denote the number of electrons as E and the feature dimension as F .  The forward pass of edge-biased attention takes
as input:  queries Q∈R   E×F     , keys K∈R   E×F     , values V∈R   E×F     , and an edge bias B∈R   E×E      and computes the output
O∈R   E×F      as follows

                                                                Sqk =X        QqfKkf +B qk,                                                                    (39)
                                                                           f

                                                                Pqk =      exp(S    qk)P
                                                                             k′ exp(S    qk′),                                                                          (40)
                                                                Oqf =X        PqkVkf.                                                                               (41)
                                                                           k









                                                                               29
F.2.2Forward gradient
We use the notation  ˙x  to represent the gradient of any tensor with respect to a scalar input.  Our forward gradient operates
in parallel over the 3Ecoordinates of the electron inputs.
                                ˙Sqk =X        ˙QqfKkf +XQqf  ˙Kkf +  ˙Bqk,                                                                                      (42)

                                          f                   f
                                                                                                                                         !
                                ˙Pqk =X       ∂P qk                  Pqk′(δ kk′−Pqk) ˙Sqk′ =P qk                ˙Sqk−X       Pqk′  ˙Sqk′    ,                           (43)

                                          k′  ∂S qk′  ˙Sqk′ =Xk′                                                         k′
                                ˙Oqf =X        ˙PqkVkf +XPqk ˙Vkf.                                                                                                  (44)

                                          k                  k

F.2.3Forward Laplacian
The second derivatives ¨xcan be calculated similarly
                 ¨Sqk =X        ¨QqfKkf +X         Qqf ¨Kkf +  ¨Bqk                   + 2X          ˙Qqf  ˙Kkf,                                                            (45)

                           f                   f                                               f
                                                            !                                                                !            X
                 ¨Pqk =P qk       ¨Sqk−XPqk′ ¨Sqk′                                      +  ˙Pqk      ˙Sqk−X       Pqk′  ˙Sqk′    −Pqk           ˙Pqk′  ˙Sqk′,           (46)

                                            k′                                                                k′                           k′
                ¨Oqf =X        ¨PqkVkf +X         Pqk ¨Vkf                               + 2X       ˙Pqk ˙Vkf.                                                             (47)

                           k                   k                                               k
The Laplacian is then defined as the sum of second derivatives with respect to every electron coordinate

                                                                                  EX    3X  ∂2x
                                                                        ∆x=                 ∂r2ei.                                                                         (48)
                                                                                 e=1   i=1
In our algorithm, we separate the parts of the Laplacian that can be computed directly from ∆Q,    ∆K,   ∆V,   ∆B from the
parts of the Laplacian involving some terms from the Jacobian.
     To accelerate this algorithm using  pallas, we note that every operation of the Forward Laplacian update is fully
parallel over the query axis (indices labelled as q).  This means that we can break inputs into blocks along the q-axis and
distribute them to separate streaming multiprocessors.  Thus, intermediate tensors such as S, P  and their derivatives are
not materialized explicitly, leading to significant performance improvements.
     We note that we have not explored writing a pallas kernel for the cross-attention mechanism that was introduced
by Li et al. [16], this has the potential to be even faster than our current set-up, whilst deviating further from standard
transformers.

F.2.4Backward gradient
We also implemented a simplified version of the backward gradient that is found in FlashAttention.  The exact calculations,
for a terminal scalar loss denotedL, are
                                                       ∂L              Pqk ∂L
                                                      ∂V ka  =Xq            ∂O qa,                                                                                         (49)
                                                       ∂L              Vka ∂L
                                                      ∂P qk  =Xa            ∂O qa,                                                                                         (50)
                                                       ∂L                ∂L     ∂P qk′
                                                      ∂S qk  =Xk′      ∂P qk′    ∂S qk                                                                                       (51)
                                                              =X         ∂L                         ∂L
                                                                   a   ∂O qaVkaPqk−Xa              ∂O qaOqaPqk,                                                    (52)
                                                       ∂L
                                                      ∂B qk  = ∂L∂S qk,                                                                                                     (53)
                                                       ∂L                ∂L
                                                     ∂Q qa  =Xk        ∂S qkKka,                                                                                         (54)
                                                       ∂L                ∂L
                                                     ∂K ka  =Xq        ∂S qkQqa.                                                                                         (55)


                                                                                    30
For implementation, the primary difference here is that wecannotparallelize the backward pass over the query axis for
every input, because we require a summation over this axes for ∂L/∂V          and ∂L/∂K        .  For the backward gradient of Q, we
parallelize over the query axis and run an inner summation over the key axis (label k).  For the backward gradient of K,V    ,
we parallelize over the key axis and run an inner summation over the query axis.  The backward gradient ofBis parallel
over both axes.

G Large scale chemical pretraining

G.1Curriculum learning for chemical space
Our objective is to pretrain a transferable wave function ansatz across a region of chemical space defined by a distribution
over molecular structures,p                    train.

Size-based curriculum.It is well known thatgradient steps are much cheaper for smaller molecules.  The computation
of the Slater determinants, for instance, scales as O(E3) in the number of electrons.  The design of Orbformer outlined in
Supplementary NoteCplaced significant emphasis on ‘composability’.  We expect that enforcing composability in our
model will allow us to learn generalizable features on small molecules that will transfer to larger ones.  Given this, it seems
sensible to take as many optimization steps on the smallest possible molecules, where they are cheapest, before training
on larger molecules.  This led us to use a curriculum learning [44] approach where we train Orbformer on datasets of
increasingly large molecules.  We created two nested curriculum levels with up to 10 and 24 electrons respectively.

Choice of atomic species and molecules.We train Orbformer on a dataset containing the atomic species H, Li, B,
C, N, O, and F. We first selected H, C, N, O, and F as a basic set of atoms that together define a rich chemical space
including a significant fraction of all organic molecules [71].  We also elected to include Li and B since they are light atoms
that allow us to cover varied and well-studied chemistry beyond standard organic chemistry [72,73].  This choice of species
allows us to convincingly demonstrate wave function generalization across chemical space and allows us to explore a variety
of interesting applications, whilst keeping the number of electrons (and hence training cost) to a minimum.  Our pretrained
Orbformer is limited to operate on this set of light atoms and is not expected to work on other atom types.
    Given this set of atoms, we identified a rich set of molecules of up to 24 electrons that contain any of these species.  We
sought to include all common organic groups [71] as well as commonly studied Li- and B-containing molecules [72,73].
We restrict ourselves to molecules with no overall charge and with a spin state that is Sz = 0 or Sz =  12, as discussed in
Supplementary NoteC.1.  Several molecules were set aside as an out-of-distribution test set.  Supplementary Table5lists
all molecules selected.

Geometry sampling.As discussed in Sec.1, the most promising application area for a chemically transferable wave
function model is to molecular structures with ‘multireference character’.  It is calculations on these structures where the
absence of ade factostandard method from classical quantum chemistry [43,74] leaves a space for neural network VMC
to fill.  We expect that geometries that are highly perturbed relative to the equilibrium geometry of a molecule, e.g. by
bond breaking, are more likely to exhibit multireference character (we shortly confirm this for our own geometries).  Yet
the majority of existing work using neural network ans¨atze for molecules has focused on equilibrium or near-equilibrium
geometries [4,5,7,27].  We also expect that generalization is unlikely to occur from training on a few geometries per
molecule—a significantly larger number of structures than has previously been considered is likely needed before the
benefits of generalization will manifest.
    We therefore generate a large number of perturbed geometries programmatically.  Our starting point is the Z-matrix
[75] of the equilibrium geometry or a known stereoisomer.  We apply probabilistic distortion to the angles and bond lengths
of the Z-matrix to create new off-equilibrium geometries.  When simulating bond-breaking, we allow a single distance entry
of the Z-matrix to be distorted by a much larger degree than the others.  Finally, we apply rejection sampling [76] to
prevent collision between any pair of atoms.  For each molecule, we generate 100–300 geometries using the five sampling
procedures outlined in Supplementary NoteI.1.  In addition, we generate a number of hypothetical reaction mechanisms
for small molecules (see Supplementary Table5).
    The resulting Light Atom Curriculum (LAC) contains 22350 structures; its molecular composition along with the
proportion of potentially multireference structures are detailed in Supplementary NoteI.1.
    We divide LAC into two curriculum levels.  Structures with up to 10 electrons with bend, stretch, and break geometries
are included in LAC Level 1.  The full dataset is referred to as Level 2 and contains all of Level 1.
    Finally, we apply on-the-fly data augmentation to all of our structures by (i) applying a random rotation, (ii) adding
independent Gaussian noise of standard deviation 0.1 Bohr to every atom coordinate.





                                                                          31
G.2Infrastructure and training phases
We trained Orbformer using up to 16 NVIDIA A100 PCIe GPUs.  Thanks to improvements in model stability, we were
able to use TensorFloat-32 [38] precision for matrix multiplication during training.  We conducted three sequential phases
of pretraining.  We found that further dividing LAC Level 1 training into two separate phases, the first using only bend
and stretch geometries, led to more stable training.  During Level 1 training, we used 8 GPUs with one molecule per GPU;
for Level 2 training we increased to 16 GPUs.  If we encountered a NaN value during training, we wound the model back to
the last checkpoint, drew a new batch of training molecules, and re-equilibrated electron samples to continue training.  We
allowed up to 200 restarts per phase.

H Fine-tuning and Evaluation

H.1Transferable fine-tuning
We found that it was efficient to fine-tune similar structures together using a single set of parameters and simultaneous
training.  This allows us to use the transferable nature of Orbformer twice—once to pretrain the model, and again to share
compute when fine-tuning.  For example, we fine-tune different geometric structures of the same molecule together, and for
the Diels–Alder reaction, we fine-tuned reactants, products, and transition states together.  This can often lead to an order
of magnitude reduction in cost over and above the benefits of pretraining.
    We recommend always fine-tuning Orbformer on target structures, as we found that at least a few steps were always
necessary.  Even with no fine-tuning, energy evaluation of the Orbformer wave function requires running MCMC and
computing local energies on target structures.  Thus, in practical terms, if the amount of fine-tuning is of the same order of
magnitude as the number of evaluation steps, fine-tuning does not significantly increase the cost of using Orbformer.

H.2Energy evaluation
To correctly assess the energy expectation value of the wave function, we re-equilibrate new MCMC chains after the
fine-tuning and compute the local energy over many MCMC steps.  The final energy estimate should be the average over
the chains and time steps, however, we found in practice that a few extreme values could lead to significant deterioration
in the estimates of the mean.  We therefore estimate arobust meanof the evaluation data by minimizing the Huber loss
[77] over the set of evaluated local energies
                                                                  ( 1
                                                       ℓδ(x) :=      2x2               if|x|<δ
                                                                     δ(|x|−         12δ)     otherwise,                                                                              (56)
                                                     Erobust = minx    XXℓδ(x−E  bt)                                                                    (57)


                                                                        b    t

where b and t respectively indicate the batch of MCMC samplers and the time step (with suitable decorrelation).  The
variance between energy estimates from different chains gives an estimate of the statistical error in our energy estimate.

H.3Metrics
The primary metric we use to compare Orbformer energies to a reference is mean absolute relative error (MARE). Suppose
we have a reaction curve with geometries indexed by i = 1,...,n.  Suppose that we have corresponding energy curvesPnPn
(Ei)ni=1   and (E′i)ni=1 .  Let  ¯E  =   1n   Pni=1 Ei  and   ¯E′  =   1n  i=1 E′i.  Then the mean absolute relative error is defined by
MARE(E               1,...,En;E′1,...,E′n) =  1n i=1|(E i−  ¯E)−(E   ′i−  ¯E′)|.

I  Structure generation and dataset composition

I.1Light Atom Curriculum dataset
Supplementary  Table5details  the  composition  of  the  LAC  dataset  and  Supplementary  Fig.11illustrates  the  basic
geometry distortion types used to generate a diverse set of configurations for the molecules of Supplementary Table5.
    To assess the multireference character of our molecules, we compute T1, D1 and the percentage of the contribution of
(T) to the total atomization energy (|%TAE|     ) diagnostics [43] using CCSD(T)/cc-pVDZ calculations viaPySCF 2.7.0
[78] for structures of 5 selected molecules with different electron numbers in the LAC dataset (1500 structures in total).
The|%TAE|diagnostic is computed using

                                                |%TAE|=  |TAE[CCSD(T)]−TAE[CCSD]|
                                                                         TAE[CCSD(T)]      ,                                                     (58)


                                                                           32
           Table 5| Composition of the Light Atom Curriculum (LAC) dataset of 22350 structures.  Formulas marked with a star contribute
           two stereo-conformers.  The excluded molecules are the test molecules from the TinyMol dataset [27].








































Subset     FormulaN      elec         Geometries                          Subset       Formula          N      elec             Geometries
               H2                   2                                                     LiBH4                                   12
               LiH                  4                                                     C2H4                                     16
               HF                 10                                                      CH3OH*                               16
               C2                  12                                                     LiCHCH2                              18
Dimers         LiF                12            50 stretch                                N2H4*                                   18
               CO                 14             50 break                                 H2BCCH                               20                     50 bend
               N2                  14                                                     HBCCH2                               20                    50 stretch
               NO                15                                      6 atoms          LiOCH3                                20                    50 break
               O2                  16                                                     CH2BOH                              22               50 stretch & bend
               F2                  18                                                     CH2CHF                               22             100 break and bend
               CH2                 8                                                      CH3BO                                 22
               H2O               10                                                       CH3CN                                 22
               LiOH             12                                                        CH3NO                                 24
               CNH              14                                                        HBO2H2*                              24
               HCN              14               50 bend                                  HCONH2                              24
               Li2O               14            50 stretch                                CH3BH2                                16
Trimers        CHF              16               50 break                                 CH3NH2*                              18
               HNO              16        50 stretch & bend                               LiCH2NH2                            20                      50 bend
               LiCN             16        100 break & bend                                CH2BNH2                             22                     50 stretch
               LiOF              20                                      7 atoms          CH3BNH                              22                      50 break
               FCN              22                                                        CH3NBH                              22               50 stretch & bend
               N2O               22                                                       C2H4O                                  24            100 break & bend
               O3                  24                                                     CH2CHOH*                          2433
               BH3                 8                                                      CH3CHO*                             24
               NH3               10                                                       C2H6*                                   18    50 bend, stretch, break
               LiNH2            12                                       8 atoms          LiCH2CH3                            20               50 stretch & bend
               C2H2              14                                                       BH2CHCH2                           22                100 break & bend
               BH2F             16                                                        CH3BCH2                             22
               CH2O             16               50 bend                                  H4           2H2                           4
               H2N2*            16              50 stretch                                C2H4            C2H2 + H2           16
4 atoms        H2O2*            18               50 break                                 H2O2            H2O + O·           18
               LiCCLi          18         50 stretch & bend             Reactions         CH3OH               CO + 2H2        18                  50 structures
               LiCHO           18         100 break & bend                                N2H4            H2N2 + H2           18
               NH2F             18                                                        C2H6            C2H4 + H2           18
               LiOOLi          22                                                         2HF            H2 + F2                 20
               BHF2             24                                                        2H2O                                    20            50 structures
               CHOF            24                                       H-bonding         H2O + NH3                           20           100 structures
               HNO2*           24                                                         H2O + HF                            20
               CH4               10                                                       C3H4                                     22
               LiCH3            12                                       Excluded         CN2H2                                  22                      n/a
               CH2BH          14                                                          CNOH                                  22
               CH2NH          16                 50 bend                                  CO2                                      22
               CH3F             18              50 stretch
5 atoms        HBCBH         18                  50 break
               NH2OH          18          50 stretch & bend
               LiCH2F          20         100 break & bend
               LiNHOH        20
               LiONH2         20
               CH2BF           22
               HCOOH         24
Figure 11|Geometry sampling methods used for programmatic generation of the LAC dataset.We generated 50
structures using bending, breaking, stretching and bending-with-stretching for every molecule, and 100 structures using
bending-with-breaking.  Note that rotation is applied separately as a data augmentation.























Figure 12|Multireference diagnostics for the LAC.The T1 D1, and|%TAE|diagnostics computed using CCSD/cc-pVDZ
wave functions for all the geometries of BH3, LiCH3, C2H4 and NH2F that are present in the LAC dataset.  These established
diagnostics indicate that LAC dataset contains a significant fraction of structures with multireference character.


where TAE[CCSD(T)] and TAE[CCSD] are the total atomization energies computed via CCSD(T)/cc-pVDZ and CCSD/cc-
pVDZ, respectively.  We apply the criteria of T1≥ 0.02, D1≥ 0.05, and|%TAE|≥      10% to indicate if a structure might
exhibit multireference character [43].  Supplementary Fig.12displays the proportion of structures with multireference
character for each geometry distortion.  There are a significant number of structures showing multireference character,
particularly with geometries distorted via bond breaking.  We repeated this analysis for the much smaller TinyMol dataset,
finding that very few, if any, structures exhibit multireference character in that dataset.

I.2Bond breaking MEP
We take the BSE49 [35] dataset as our inspiration when constructing our own BBMEP dataset.  BSE49 is a diverse dataset
that benchmarks the homolytic dissociation energies of various molecules (A                       B) by computing the closed-shell molecules
and their corresponding radical fragments (A· and B·).  However, it remains challenging to compute structures and
energies along the entire dissociation curve due to the multireference character of those structures.  In this study, we select
five closed-shell molecules with different electron sizes from BSE49 [35] dataset (Supplementary Table6) and construct
their corresponding minimum energy paths (MEPs), i.e., transition paths between initial and final images, of the homolytic
bond breaking reactions (A          B        A· + B·), which is referred to as the BBMEP dataset.  The A                     B reactant structures
(initial images) are directly extracted from BSE49 dataset and the product structures (final images) are constructed by
combining the two radicals along its original bond direction at 6 ˚A. The bonds that are broken are shown in the Figure3in
the main text.  The Nudged Elastic Band (NEB) [79] method is a commonly used approach to find the MEPs for homolytic
cleavage reactions, and we apply the climbing-image [80] AutoNEB [81] implementation inASE 3.22.1[82] with 20 total
images relaxed by PBE [83] / def2-TZVP [84] with D3BJ [85,86] corrections computed usingORCA 5.0[87].  The initial
and final images are provided to the AutoNEB and the initial guesses of the intermediate images are generated by image
dependent pair potential (IDPP) [88] approach and then optimized with FIRE [89] optimizer and a maximum force of 0.05
(fmax=0.05) along the NEB path.  The final collected MEP structrues are included in our GitHub repository.  Please note


                                                                          34
Table 6| Composition of the bond breaking minimum energy path (BBMEP) dataset.  Each path contains 20 total images, including
the initial and final images.

                    System                                                 Reaction                                       Dissociated bondN       elec
                    Ethane                                CH3CH3            CH3CH2· + H·                               C         H                18
                 Formamide                            HCONH2                 HCONH· + H·                              N          H                24
                 1-Propanol                  CH3CH2CH2OH                     CH2CH2CH2O· + H·                    O               H                34
           2-Aminopropan-2-ol           (CH3)2NCH2OH                          ·CH 2N(CH3)2 +·OH                    C             O                42
                  L-Alanine            HOOCCH(CH3)NH2                        HOOC· +·CH(CH                   3)NH2              CC                48

     Table 7|Reference deep QMC absolute energies of five MEP curves in Hartree.  The stochastic errors are also included.

            Image ID          Ethane             Formamide          1-Propanol       2-Aminopropan-2-ol        L-Alanine
                  0           -79.82485(164)    -169.90316(12)     -194.35847(2)          -249.72372(12)         -323.76290(22)
                  1            -79.82256(55)      -169.90378(1)      -194.35793(4)          -249.72086(9)          -323.77085(26)
                  2            -79.81550(57)     -169.89904(10)     -194.35672(7)          -249.72220(10)         -323.76719(29)
                  3            -79.77022(40)      -169.88887(9)     -194.34606(10)          -249.72366(9)          -323.76160(28)
                  4            -79.70922(50)      -169.86811(8)      -194.31957(9)          -249.72745(5)          -323.76803(33)
                  5             -79.65521(5)       -169.73234(9)      -194.23575(9)          -249.72454(11)         -323.77344(10)
                  6            -79.63422(74)      -169.71585(4)      -194.20289(3)          -249.69502(10)         -323.75211(29)
                  7           -79.60235(143)     -169.83813(6)      -194.18426(4)          -249.63980(8)          -323.75864(3)
                  8           -79.59743(121)     -169.86235(5)      -194.17617(4)          -249.61615(12)         -323.76477(25)
                  9            -79.63422(41)      -169.86518(9)      -194.17345(7)          -249.59906(8)          -323.76331(23)
                 10          -79.64304(153)     -169.86527(6)      -194.17316(5)          -249.58461(7)          -323.75992(11)
                 11          -79.64785(146)     -169.85041(6)      -194.17274(5)          -249.57176(14)         -323.76476(15)
                 12          -79.64688(145)     -169.73853(4)      -194.17312(5)          -249.56164(13)         -323.75962(11)
                 13          -79.64784(161)     -169.69446(8)      -194.17262(9)          -249.56518(14)          -323.76217(5)
                 14           -79.64879(50)      -169.69352(4)      -194.17324(9)          -249.56474(26)         -323.66576(19)
                 15           -79.64920(17)      -169.69160(8)      -194.17328(7)          -249.56572(29)          -323.60473(8)
                 16           -79.64993(97)     -169.69411(14)     -194.17306(7)          -249.56542(8)          -323.52371(5)
                 17           -79.65030(78)     -169.69243(18)    -194.17617(13)         -249.56586(20)          -323.60698(9)
                 18          -79.65005(126)    -169.69549(12)    -194.17523(17)         -249.56580(13)         -323.60705(35)
                 19           -79.64967(84)      -169.69411(6)      -194.17625(3)          -249.56581(14)          -323.61342(9)


that the endpoint structures that we use in our 20-point dissociation pathways arenotthe same as the BSE49 endpoint
structures, but are produced from the AutoNEB procedure.
    Deep QMC reference energies.The deep QMC reference energies that we computed for our BBMEP dissociation
curves are presented in Supplementary Table7.  The protocol used to compute these values is described in Supplementary
Table9.  Note that we use much larger batch sizes for the reference calculations, ran separate single-point calculations for
every geometry.  To reduce similarity between our own deep QMC calculations and the references, we used the Psiformer
ansatz for Ethane and Formamide.  However, we struggled to converge Psiformer for the larger molecules.  We therefore used
Orbformer in single-molecule mode for these reference calculations—this version of the ansatz has no Orbital Generator
network making it closer in spirit to the Psiformer while being more stable.
    We perform two validations on these reference energies.  First, Supplementary Table9shows the statistical errors in
the Monte Carlo evaluation of the energy that we performed for each of these calculations.  All statistical errors are well
below 1 mHa.  Secondly, we validate ourprotocolby running it on the original BSE49 endpoints.  We run our protocol
in two different ways—first by running separate calculations on the two dissociated fragments, and second by running
on a combined system of the two fragments separated by 1000 ˚A. We can then compare these values to the literature
dissociation energies.  Since the overall dissociation energy depends only on the endpoints, it can be computed more reliably
with single-reference methods, as was done in Prasad et al. [35] In Supplementary Table8, we see that the two deep QMC
references are in excellent agreement with each other, this gives and also agree well with the literature values.  With these
validations, we believe that our reference energies for our BBMEP structures, including the multireference structures, are
the most accurate obtainable reference values.
    Energy conversion calculations.A single NVIDIA A100 GPU is 300 W and a 64 core AMD EPYC 7763 CPU is
280W, therefore the GPU/CPU power conversion factor is 300/(280/64) = 68.571.






                                                                               35
Table 8| Comparison of dissociation energies for reactant and product structures from literature for five BBMEP curves (kcal/mol)
using literature high-quality electronic structure calculations and our deep QMC reference protocol for the BBMEP experiment with
large batch sizes and long training times.  Note that the underlying geometries are distinct from the geometries in our BBMEP
experiment; here we use geometries from the BSE49 dataset.

                 System              Literature (RO)CBS-QB3 [35]    deep QMC reference    deep QMC reference 1000      ˚A
                 Ethane                                 109.29                                  108.80                                 108.80
              Formamide                              124.50                                  124.50                                 124.47
              1-Propanol                              113.00                                  112.33                                 112.44
         2-Aminopropan-2-ol                       98.43†                                    97.45                                   97.68
               L-Alanine                                90.26                                    89.79                                   89.83
         † This value is reported in the BSE49 dataset “BES49             Existing   1327” but labelled as “Dimethylaminomethanol”


I.3Diels-Alder reaction dataset
We aim to characterize the two possible pathways along which the cycloaddition of ethene and trans-butadiene might
proceed.   The  concerted  and  step-wise  mechanisms  naturally  share  their  reactants  (ethene,  butadiene)  and  product
(cyclohexene).  The concerted pathway proceeds through a single transition state structure, while the step-wise mechanism
involves two transitions states flanking an intermediate structure.  Of the two step-wise transition states, here we only
consider the first one, as it has the higher energy of the two [31], and therefore presumably determines the reaction rate
along the pathway.  In total, this amounts to six considered molecular structures (ethene, butadiene, cyclohexene, concerted
transition state, first step-wise transition state, step-wise intermediate).  The geometries of these species are taken from the
work of Lischka [31], where they are optimized at the MRAQCC(6,6) level of theory.  Zero-point vibrational and thermal
corrections for all species are also taken from the same work, computed using the B3LYP density functional and the
6-31G** basis set.

J  Hyperparameters of each experiment

The hyperparameters of each experiment presented in the main text are summarized in Supplementary Table9.

K Additional results

K.1Additional results on the Diels–Alder reaction
After establishing the highly satisfactory match between Orbformer and experimental results on the iconic Diels–Alder
reaction energy and concerted activation barrier, we turn our attention to the intricate step-wise mechanism, involving
biradical transition states and intermediate structure.  Supplementary Fig.13summarizes theoretical estimates for the
first activation energy of this pathway.  As no experimental data is available for this quantity, theoretical results can only
be compared among themselves.  The Orbformer result agrees best with the density functional estimates, predicting an
activation energy somewhere between the M06-2X and B2-PLYP values.  Compared to these CASPT2 and MRAQCC
predict a significantly lower energy barrier, just as for the concerted reaction pathway.  Overall, Orbformer’s prediction
that the concerted pathway is favoured to the step-wise one by about 10 kcal/mol is in good agreement with the currently
available theoretical and experimental data [30,32].

K.2Comparing to experimental reference for dinitrogen dissociation
Another valuable feature of Orbformer is the capacity to simultaneously model several molecules, with very different
electronic structures, without loss in accuracy.  To demonstrate this property we consider the PES of the N2 dissociation
and compare (geometrically) transferable training on a dataset of 38 N2 geometries with (chemically) transferable training
on the same 38 N2 geometries and an additional ten geometries of ethene (C2H4), replicating the setting of Gao and
G¨unnemann [22].  This also gives us an opportunity to compare with one of the very few experimental references for the
interior of a bond dissociation curve [90].  Both trainings used a total of 200k iterations split evenly across the datasets of
38 and 48 molecules, respectively.  With N2 forming a triple bond and ethene containing double and single bonds only, these
systems show very different characteristics albeit being of similar size.  Despite their dissimilarity, our results in Fig14
show that training Orbformer with ethene as a distractor does not have a negative effect on relative energies and both
runs are in perfect agreement with previous results [23].  Moreover, these results confirm that Orbformer can match very
well with an experimental reference, including in the strongly correlated regime.  We note that the original experimental
reference has uncertainty above 1 kcal/mol.  The close agreement between deep-learning QMC and r12-MR-ACPF [91]
(two completely unrelated theoretical methods) gives us further confidence in the adequacy of our theoretical description.
Comparing total energies of the geometrically transferable N2 optimization and the optimization on the distractor dataset,


                                                                            36
Figure 13| Stepwise pathway of the Diels–Alder reaction.Activation energies of the Diels–Alder reaction studied in Sec.2.2
via thestepwisepathway.  All details are the same as in Fig.2.  The experimental activation energy of 25.8 kcal/mol is below all
results presented here, strongly indicating that the stepwise mechanism is not energetically favoured.


we obtain a small increase of about 0.2 mHa.  We attribute this to the reduced number of training iterations per geometry.
Orbformer’s capability of representing distinct molecules is all the more remarkable in the context of its generalization
properties in chemically transferable pretraining.

K.3Comparing iteration timing
We compare iteration timing between different versions of Orbformer compared to a naive Psiformer implementation.  In
this study, we used a batch size of 256 and ran on a single geometry of each of the molecules used in the bond-breaking
experiments.  We clearly see that the larger molecules benefit more from the engineering improvements that we considered,
which is consistent with Li et al. [16].  Overall, these improvements give about a 1  .7× speed-up compared to a naive
Psiformer and a 2.6×speed-up compared to a naive Orbformer.

K.4Alkanes
The largest molecule in this dataset contains 106 electrons, making it significantly larger than the LAC and larger than
most structures previously tackled using deep QMC. The alkanes dataset was constructed systematically with perfectly
tetrahedral angles, with CC bond length of 1.5210˚A and CH bond lengths of 1.0919˚A. This construction ensures that,
when examining composability, the local environments are identical between different alkanes.
    Beyond the model introspection presented in the main paper, we also sought to establish that our model had indeed
converged on this dataset including some large molecules up to 106 electrons.  We fine-tuned the model across 32 GPUs with
32 electron samples per GPU. For this training, we used the ULA/MALA sampling scheme that we used for pretraining in
order to get a better coverage of electron space.
    Given our construction of the molecules, we would expect that the total energy scales almost exactly linearly in the
number of carbon atoms.  We verified that CCSD(T) indeed gives a linear energy scaling in energy for these molecules.
In Supplementary Fig.16(left) we fitted a linear model to the total energies of the eight alkanes and saw residuals of
order no more than 1 kcal/mol, with an MSE of 0.92.  This indicates that the model has converged well, and furthermore
it gives an indication that, with joint fine-tuning, it is not the case that smaller molecules converge faster.  However, it
is also clear that linear scaling of the energy is not an automatically satisfied property for Orbformer.  We assume this


                                                                          37
Figure 14| Dinitrogen dissociation with and without distractors.Relative energy of the N                        2 dissociation with and without
ethene as a distractor molecule in the fine-tuning dataset.  Additionally, results obtained with the r12-MR-ACPF reference theoretical
method are also shown [91].  The usual mean-shifting is applied to all energies.  Error bars show the statistical error (one standard
deviation of the estimates from independent MCMC chains, cf. Suppl. NoteH.2).


may be because 16 determinants are used for each molecule, which hampers exact properties like size consistency and size
extensivity being present.  In Supplementary Fig.16(right), we looked at the difference between Orbformer total energies
and CCSD(T)/CBS energies.  Now it becomes apparent that, whilst both models achieve a linear scaling of energy with
system size, the Orbformer total energies are significantly lower across the board, indicating that Orbformer does a much
better job of capturing electron correlation.

K.5Azulene–naphthalene isomerization
To showcase the ability of the proposed approach to accurately describe aromaticity and large-scale conjugation,  we
evaluated the reaction energy of the azulene–naphthalene isomerization using an Orbformer model fine-tuned from the
LAC checkpoint.  Equilibrium geometries for naphthalene and azulene were obtained from Mirzaei et al. [92].  Fine-tuning
was carried out jointly for the two geometries, for 80k steps.  The reference reaction energy value was obtained with the W1
composite approach [93] at the CCSD(T)/CBS level of theory.  Orbformer’s predicted reaction energy converges convincingly
within chemical accuracy of the reference 36.8 kcal/mol after 50k fine-tuning iterations.  Sampling errors were not obtained,
due to the use of the robust mean in computing the energy expectation values.  Instead the four separate evaluations
along the fine-tuning trajectory are intended to demonstrate the reliability of both sampling and training convergence.
The fact that Orbformer can appropriately describe the extended delocalized π-system of naphthalene indicates that our
composable architecture does not hinder modelling the behaviour of electron delocalization at this scale.  In further support
of this, Supplementary Fig.18visualizes three selected one-particle envelopes of the fine-tuned Orbformer model for
naphthalene.  The three orbitals, localized to one, three and four carbon atoms respectively, illustrate how Orbformer can
operate on the different length-scales required for the description of the electronic structure of naphthalene.  Further, we
recall that Orbformer orbitals are pointwise products between envelopes and transformer representations.  Transformer
representations, unlike classical orbitals, are functions of all electron positions and spins rather than of one electron’s
position.  To guarantee composability for large separations of subsystems, the distance-weighted attention mechanism
employed in Orbformer introduces a finite perceptive field for the interactions.  However, the electron-electron correlation
is not directly mediated by the orbital envelope.  This means that, even with a rather localised envelope, some long-range
electron correlation can be captured by the transformer representations.

K.6Atomization energies of small molecules
While other experiments of this manuscript mainly compare the performance of Orbformer against other theoretical
methods, here we provide a comparison of Orbformer’s predicted atomization energies against experimental references.
Reference data was collected for 19 molecules from the active thermochemical tables (ATcT) [94], by subtracting the
standard  gas  phase  heat  of  formation  of  the  molecule  from  those  of  the  constituent  atoms,  at  0  K.  Geometries  and


                                                                          38
Figure 15| Variational training iteration time reduction from engineering enhancements.We show the relative iteration
time of Orbformer compared to an unimproved Psiformer implementation, isolating the effects of TensorFloat-32 precision (TF32),
Forward Laplacian and FlashAttention.






















Figure 16|Evaluating model convergence on the alkanes dataset.We use linear scaling of energy as a criterion for
convergence.  Left:  residuals from a linear fit of a model fine-tuned from the LAC for 180k steps.  Right:  the difference between the
aforementioned Orbformer model and CCSD(T)/CBS total energies, with a linear fit line.  Here we see that Orbformer obtains much
lower energies, whilst both observe a linear scaling in the molecule size.


corrections for zero-point vibrational effects were obtained from the theoretical study benchmarking the W4 composite
method [95].  Orbformer was finetuned from the LAC checkpoint independently for each considered molecule.  The deviations
of the zero-point corrected Orbformer total atomization energies (TAE) from experimental references are displayed on
Supplementary Fig.19.  All but one of the Orbformer values fall within   ±1 kcal/mol of the experimental value.  The
MAE of 0.51 kcal/mol across the 19 molecules engenders confidence in the quality of Orbformer results as compared to
experiment.

L Traditional electronic structure calculation details

L.1Energy calculations
To compare the efficiency and accuracy of Orbformer, we perform traditional electronic structure calculations at various
costs and accuracy using commonly used theories.  Without human expert design and intervention, all the calculations
are  run  under  a  practitioner  perspective  to  have  a  more  fair  comparison.   Without  any  further  specification,  all  the
SCF calculations, including KS-DFT [96], restricted open-shell determinant (ROHF) [97] and active space SCF method
(CASSCF) [98], are computed using an energy convergence threshold of 10  −10    a.u.  and gradient convergence threshold to
10−6    a.u. with a maximum SCF cycle of 500.  All the post-SCF calculations, including unrestricted coupled-cluster with
single, double and a perturbative treatment of triple excitations (UCCSD(T)) [99], the second-order   n-electron valence


                                                                          39
Figure 17| Comparison of the predicted reaction energy for the azulene-naphthalene isomerization between high-level electronic
structure methods Orbformer and CCSD(T) at the complete basis set limit.  The coupled cluster result was computed in-house, using
the W1 thermochemical protocol [93].  The Orbformer checkpoint pretrained on LAC was finetuned on azulene and naphthalene
jointly.  Orbformer energies were obtained by computing the robust mean of energies obtained in independent evaluation runs.


















Figure 18| Visualizations of three selected one-particle envelopes of naphthalene from the Orbformer model finetuned on azulene
and naphthalene.



























Figure 19| Deviations of the zero-point corrected Orbformer total atomization energies from experimental reference values [94].
Error bars show the statistical error (one standard deviation of the estimates from independent MCMC chains, cf. Suppl. NoteH.2).



                                                                              40
state perturbation theory (NEVPT2) [100], and density-fitted uncontracted multireference configuration interaction with
single and double excitations and Davidson size-extensivity correction (DF-MRCISD+Q) [101], are computed using an
energy convergence threshold of 10−10    a.u. and a maximum iteration of 600.
    In this study, all the complete basis set (CBS) extrapolations are performed with a two-point extrapolation strategy
used inORCA 5.0[87] in equations59and60.  The final total energy is computed asE               ∞total =E ∞SCF +E ∞corr

                                                        EXSCF =E ∞SCF +Aexp(−α    √X),                                                                (59)

where X is the basis set cardinal number and in this study we use aug-cc-pVDZ (X = 2) and aug-cc-pVTZ (X = 3) basis
sets [102],   A is a parameter to be computed, α = 4.3 is a basis-set dependent constant [103], and  E∞SCF is the corresponding
SCF energy at CBS limit.  We compute the extrapolated correlation energy as

                                                          E∞corr = XβEXcorr−Y  βEXcorrXβ−Y  β   ,                                                                   (60)

where β = 2.51 is a basis-set dependent constant [103],   X = 2,Y  = 3 are the basis set cardinal numbers for aug-cc-pVDZ
and aug-cc-pVTZ, respectively, in this study, andE  ∞corr is the corresponding correlation energy at CBS limit.
    The computational details for each theory at specific basis sets are as follows:

    •  UB3LYP-D3(BJ)/Def2-QZVPP: The spin-unrestricted B3LYP[104–107] plus D3 dispersion correction with Becke–Johnson
       damping [85,86] with the Def2-QZVPP basis set [108] calculations are performed byPySCF 2.7.0[78] withPySCF-
       dispersion 1.3.0plug-in, which interferencesSimple-DFTD3 1.2.1[109].

    •  UM06-2X-D3/Def2-QZVPP: The spin-unrestricted M06-2X [110] plus D3 dispersion correction [85,111] with the
       Def2-QZVPP  basis  set  [108]  calculations  are  performed  byPySCF  2.7.0[78]  withPySCF-dispersion  1.3.0
       plug-in, which interferencesSimple-DFTD3 1.2.1[109].  Note that M06-X has already included mid-range dispersion
       correction in the parametrization, but literature study suggests a D3 correction could still benefit the calculation
       [112].

    •  UωB97X-V-D3(BJ)/Def2-QZVPP: The spin-unrestricted ωB97X-V [113,114] plus D3 dispersion correction with
       Becke–Johnson damping [85,86] with the Def2-QZVPP basis set [108] calculations are performed byPySCF 2.7.0
       [78] withPySCF-dispersion 1.3.0plug-in, which interferencesSimple-DFTD3 1.2.1[109].

    •  UCCSD(T)/CBS: The UCCSD(T) with aug-cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-pVTZ basis set calculations are performed using
       ROHF wavefunctions [99,115].  The two-point CBS extrapolation then is performed by separately extrapolating the
       SCF and correlation contributions via equations59and60, respectively.

    •  NEVPT2/CASSCF(10,10)/CBS: In this study, NEVPT2 calculations are computed [100] using the strongly contracted
      (SC) internal contraction scheme [116,117] implemented inPySCF 2.7.0[78] with a CASSCF wavefunction.  CASSCF
       is solved by the FCI solver [118] with 10 electron and 10 active orbitals in the active space and the initial guess of
       the CASSCF is using ROHF wavefuction.  To automatically select an active space with a consistent active space size,
       we use the initial guess strategy introduced in PySCF, which is not the best but a practical approach to select active
       space.  After ROHF calculations, we localize orbitals for occupied and virtual spaces separately via Pipek-Mezey
      (PM) localization [119].  The orbitals then are sorted by their MO coefficients and the top 10 MOs are picked as the
       active space.

    •  DF-MRCISD+Q/aug-cc-pVDZ: We note that due to inefficient memory for L-Alanine dissociation MEP calculations
       with  aug-cc-pVTZ  basis  set,  only  calculations  using  aug-cc-pVDZ  basis  set  were  performed.   All  MRCISD+Q
       calculations are performed using frozen-core uncontracted MRCI solved by a Davidson solver implemented inORCA
       5.0[87].  As is common practice in electronic structure calculations, we apply the density fitting (DF) approximation,
       also known as the resolution of identity (RI), with the automatically generated auxiliary basis set [120] to speed up
       the calculations.  CASSCF is solved by the default solver and active space selection strategy implemented inORCA
       5.0with 10 active electrons and 10 active orbitals in the active space and a DF-ROHF wavefuction as initial guess.

    •  DF-MRAQCC/aug-cc-pVDZ: Similar to the DF-MRCISD+Q/aug-cc-pVDZ calculations, we perform frozen-core
       uncontracted MRAQCC calculations solved by DIIS solver viaORCA 5.0[87] with CASSCF wavefunctions initialized
       by ROHF solutions.  Active space selection is performed by the default strategy inORCA 5.0an active space with
       10 active electrons and 10 active orbitals.






                                                                         41
MExtended discussion

Looking to future developments that may follow on from Orbformer, we saw that pretraining reduces the amount of
fine-tuning required to achieve chemical accuracy, often very substantially, yet in very few cases was it possible to evaluate
energies directly from the pretrained model with no fine-tuning.  We believe that with a further improved and much
larger  model  than  Orbformer,  it  will  be  possible  to  converge  to  chemical  accuracy  across  a  dataset  as  large  as  the
LAC without the need for fine-tuning.  Yet increasing model capacity without significantly slowing down training and
remaining within memory constraints of current hardware presents a serious challenge.  One direction would be to do
more processing that is independent of the electron positions, since any computations here bypass the Laplacian.  It
would also be beneficial to improve the single-determinant version of the model to match the current 16-determinant
Orbformer, since a single-determinant model is size consistent by construction, and this may lead to improvements in
generalization.  Engineering development of the K-FAC [69] optimizer would also be necessary for further scaling of this
technology.  Another axis of development would be to extend Orbformer to operate on charged systems and systems with a
total z-spin that is different to 0 or  12.  Here, the localization of Orbformer orbitals presents a conceptual challenge, since
it is unclear where in space any orbitals should be added or removed when forming an ion.  For certain molecules, say
R   COO–, we can form a good guess as to where the negative charge will be localized.  However, for a more obscure ion
such as any R–, the new orbital may not be localized at all.  The case of spin is likely to be somewhat easier to handle, as
the total number of orbitals does not change.  We envisage that communicating the overall spin of the molecule to all the
molecule-dependent parts of the network would allow it to correctly adapt to changes in the overall molecular spin.


















































                                                                         42
              Table 9|  Training hyperparameters for all the experiments.   aOrbformer trained in single molecule mode (see Supplementary
              NoteC.6).                     bTrained across 32 GPUs using the ULA/MALA sampling scheme:  the same molecule will be sampled on multiple GPUs
              but with an independent batch of electron samples.















































                                                                                                               Electron         Molecule        Hartree–Fock         Training       Evaluation
   Experiment               Dataset              Ansatz               Trainingmode                            batch size       batch size         train steps           steps         steps per
                                                                                                                                                                                     structure
                            TinyMol pretrain      Orbformer     chemical pretraining        1024            4                 -              512 k            -
     TinyMol                TinyMol test sets      Orbformer       geom-transferable
                                                                                    fine-tuning               512             4                 -              32 k            8k
                            TinyMol test sets      Psiformer            single-pointtraining                2048            1               20 k            32 k            2k

                                   Ethane             Psiformer            single-pointtraining                2048            1               20 k           200 k          10 k
      BBMEP
     reference                  Formamide          Psiformer            single-pointtraining                4096            1               20 k           250 k          10 k
                               1-Propanol &
                           2-Aminopropan-2-ol    Orbformera           single-pointtraining                4096            1                 -              250 k          10 k
                                 L-Alanine          Orbformera           single-pointtraining                4096            1                 -              300 k          10 k

      BBMEP                        Ethane             Psiformer            single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              40 k           6 k
Psiformer scratch
  (large batch),                Formamide          Psiformer            single-pointtraining                2048            1                 -              50 k           6 k
single structures

      BBMEP                        Ethane            Orbformer           single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              32 k           6 k43
    Orbformer
  scratch, single               Formamide          Orbformer           single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              100 k          6 k
     structures
                                 1-Propanol          Orbformer           single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              120 k          6 k

                           2-Aminopropan-2-ol    Orbformer           single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              160 k          6 k

                                 L-Alanine           Orbformer           single-pointtraining                1024            1                 -              500 k          6 k

      BBMEP                        Ethane            Orbformer       geom-transferabletraining/fine-tuning         256             4                 -              32 k           6 k
    Orbformer
     scratch or                 Formamide          Orbformer       geom-transferabletraining/fine-tuning         256             4                 -              100 k          6 k
LAC fine-tuning,
  all structures                 1-Propanol          Orbformer       geom-transferabletraining/fine-tuning         256             4                 -              120 k          6 k

                           2-Aminopropan-2-ol    Orbformer       geom-transferabletraining/fine-tuning         256             4                 -              160 k          6 k

                                 L-Alanine           Orbformer       geom-transferabletraining or fine-tuning        256             4                 -              500 k          6 k


   Diels–Alder            all structures         Orbformer           single-pointtraining                4096            1                 -              200k           8k
                               all structures         Orbformer       geom-transferablefine-tuning               512             8                 -              200k           8k

      Alkanes             Alkanes C6–13        Orbformer     molecule-transferablefine-tuning                32            32b                -              180k           20k