 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission


                The Augmented Tree Tensor Network Cookbook

   Nora Reini´c     1,2, Luka Paveši´c     1,2 Daniel Jaschke        3,2,1 and Simone Montangero            1,2

1 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia "G. Galilei" & Padua Quantum Technologies Research
               Center, Università degli Studi di Padova, Italy I-35131, Padova, Italy
                 2 INFN, Sezione di Padova, via Marzolo 8, I-35131, Padova, Italy
  3 Institute for Complex Quantum Systems & Center for Integrated Quantum Science and
           Technology, Ulm University, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89069 Ulm, Germany


Abstract

An augmented tree tensor network (aTTN) is a tensor network ansatz constructed by
applying a layer of unitary disentanglers to a tree tensor network.  The disentanglers
absorb a part of the system’s entanglement.  This makes aTTNs suitable for simulating
higher-dimensional lattices, where the entanglement increases with the lattice size even
for states that obey the area law.  These lecture notes serve as a detailed guide for im-
plementing the aTTN algorithms.  We present a variational algorithm for ground state
search and discuss the measurement of observables, and offer an open-source implemen-
tation within the Quantum TEA library.  We benchmark the performance of the ground
state search for different parameters and hyperparameters in the square lattice quan-
tum Ising model and the triangular lattice Heisenberg model for up to 32×32 spins. The
benchmarks identify the regimes where the aTTNs offer advantages in accuracy relative
to computational cost compared to matrix product states and tree tensor networks.


















  Copyright attribution to authors.                                       Received Date
  This work is a submission to SciPost Physics Lecture Notes.             Accepted Date
  License information to appear upon publication.                         Published Date
  Publication information to appear upon publication.


Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                            2

2   What is an augmented tree tensor network?                                               4

3   Ingredients                                                                                                                  5

                                                        1
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



     3.1    Tree tensor network                                                                                     6
     3.2    Disentanglers                                                                                       7
     3.3    Matrix product operators                                                                            8
             3.3.1    Matrix product operator for the system Hamiltonian                 8
             3.3.2    Effective operators                                                                          9
             3.3.3    Environments                                                                          9

4   Recipe 1: Ground state search                                                                        10
     4.1    Optimizing the disentangler layer                                                                   11
             4.1.1    MERA-like disentangler optimization                                      13
             4.1.2    Disentangler optimization with gradient descent                            14
     4.2    Details on the environment contractions                                              14
             4.2.1    Obtaining the left and right environment                                14
             4.2.2    Contracting to global environment                                          17
     4.3    Updating the Hamiltonian matrix product operator                                   18
             4.3.1    Contracting the disentangler with a tensor product operator term      19
     4.4    Computational complexity overview                                                         20
             4.4.1    Complexity of the optimization of the disentangler layer                    21
             4.4.2    Complexity of the variational ground state search with the auxiliary
                        Hamiltonian                                                                             21

5   Recipe 2: Measurement of observables                                                  21
     5.1    Measuring local versus non-local observables with tree tensor networks  22
     5.2    Measurement of an observable with the augmented tree tensor network  22
     5.3    Two-body correlation measurement                                                   23

6   Tips for serving                                                                                              25
     6.1    Positioning the disentanglers                                                              26
             6.1.1    Restrictions on positioning the disentanglers                         26
             6.1.2    Automatic disentangler positioning                                           27
     6.2    Comparison to matrix product states and tree tensor networks                29
             6.2.1    Quantum Ising model on a square lattice                                          29
             6.2.2    Heisenberg model on a triangular lattice                                           33
     6.3    Disentangler optimization gain across sweeps                                             35

7   Conclusion                                                                                               35

References                                                                                                                      36




1 Introduction

Tensor network methods are a family of widely-used numerical methods developed for simu-
lating quantum many-body systems [1–3   ]. A tensor network is an ansatz for a quantum state,
constructed such that the computational complexity of the underlying operations and algo-
rithms scales polynomially with the bond dimension m.  The bond dimension – the size of
the tensors in the network – corresponds to the number of Schmidt coefficients of the state’s
bipartitions and therefore determines the amount of entanglement that the tensor network


                                                                  2
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



can faithfully capture.  This typically also increases with the complexity of the network.  Si-
multaneously,  the polynomial degree of the algorithm’s computational complexity depends
on the details of the various ansätze.  One thus aims to find a balance between how well an
ansatz captures the state’s physical properties and how numerically efficient or inefficient the
corresponding algorithms are.
    The most successful ansatz for one-dimensional systems is the matrix product state (MPS) [4–
6], where the tensors are arranged in a line.  The cost of the variational ground state search
for the MPS [7] scales as O(m3). The MPS is capable of representing the quantum states that
obey the area law of entanglement in one physical dimension.  This property is important in
one dimension because the ground states of local gapped Hamiltonians often obey the area
law of entanglement [8–10   ].  Other common ansätze are the projected entangled-pair state
(PEPS) [11–13     ] – the two-dimensional analogue of the MPS – and the multi-scale entangle-
ment renormalization ansatz (MERA) [14], designed for simulating one-dimensional systems
at criticality [15].  However, manipulating PEPS or MERA is numerically challenging due to
their loopy structure. This leads to high computational cost of the underlying algorithms (for
PEPS optimization commonly scaling as O(m10) [16], improving to O(m9) with a sampling-
based approach in recently introduced methods [17],  and O(m≥7) for MERA optimization
in one dimension [18] or O(m16) in two dimensions [19]).  Another possibility is given by
tree tensor networks (TTN) [20,21     ], which represent the state with a tree-like structure. The
TTN is a middle ground between the MPS and PEPS/MERA. It provides more adaptability to
higher-dimensional lattices and long-range interactions compared to the MPS, while keeping
a reasonably efficient optimization algorithm, O(m4) [22] for one-tensor updates.  However,
the TTN architecture does not capture the area law in two dimensions [23,24     ].
    Recently, another pathway has been introduced in Refs. [25–27     ] with the augmented tree
tensor network (aTTN) ansatz, whose geometry enables capturing the entanglement area law
in any dimension [25].  The aTTN is augmented with a layer of disentanglers applied to the
physical links of a TTN. It represents a subclass of MERA, with disentanglers applied only
on the lowest layer.  So far, a ground state search optimization algorithm was introduced for
the aTTNs.  However, identifying the regimes where aTTNs give the advantage in terms of
precision versus computational resources with respect to other tensor network ansätze is not
straightforward.
    This cookbook aims to be a detailed and practical guide through the aTTN operations, giv-
ing the recipes for implementation of the ground state search optimization and measurement
of observables,  and providing insights into the performance of the optimization algorithm
in various parameter and hyperparameter regimes.  All the described algorithms are imple-
mented within the open-source tensor network library Quantum TEA  [28].  We also provide
pedagogical Jupyter Notebooks for running the aTTN ground state search in the supplemental
material [29].  Therefore, the cookbook is intended for everyone interested in understanding
and implementing the algorithm themselves, or using it with the Quantum TEA library.  We
proceed with the assumption that the reader is familiar with standard tensor network concepts.
Otherwise, see Refs. [1,2,7,30,31             ].
    The cookbook is structured as follows. First, an introduction to the aTTN geometry is given
in Sec.2. We define and set the notation for all relevant tensor network objects in Sec.3. Then,
the ground state search algorithms are described in Sec.4, with a detailed explanation of two
different approaches to the disentangler optimization.   We then proceed to the description
of the measurement of the observables in Sec.5, highlighting the differences compared to
the TTN implementation. Finally, we give an insight into how the aTTNs perform in different
regimes and in which cases we can expect the advantage in comparison to the MPS and TTN in
Sec.6. We show the results of the benchmarks using GPU on the square lattice quantum Ising
model and triangular lattice Heisenberg model, for different combinations of aTTN parameters


                                                        3
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



and hyperparameters. We conclude with a summary and an outlook in Sec.7.


2 What is an augmented tree tensor network?

The augmented Tree Tensor Network (aTTN) is a tensor network ansatz defined as:


                                          |ψaTTN〉 = D(u)|ψTTN〉 ,                                                 (1)

where|ψTTN〉 is a Tree Tensor Network (TTN), and D(u) =Qk uk is a set of two-site unitary
gates uk, called disentanglers, applied on the TTN’s bottom layer, i.e., tensors with physical
links. The graphical representation of the aTTN for an example with three disentangler gates
is shown in Fig.1(a).















     Figure 1: The augmented tree tensor network (aTTN) ansatz. (a) An aTTN with
     three disentanglers for a system of N = 16 sites. The full aTTN state|ψaTTN〉 consists
     of a tree tensor network state|ψTTN〉 (black circles) and a disentangler layer D(u)
     (green rectangles) applied to|ψTTN〉.   (b) Comparison between the TTN and the
     aTTN ground state search energies for different bond dimensions m, computed for
     the nearest-neighbour quantum Ising model on a 32× 32 lattice near the critical
     point. The aTTN shows an improvement in energy with respect to the TTN for every
     bond dimension point.

The role of the disentanglers is to encode the entanglement between the subsystems they
connect.  This allows the aTTN ansatz to represent states with more entanglement compared
to the TTN with the same bond dimension. As a demonstration, in Fig.1(b) we compare the
ground state energies obtained with the TTN and the aTTN for the nearest-neighbour quantum
Ising Hamiltonian  ˆH =−P<i j>σixσ jx− hPiσiz  on a 32× 32 lattice with open boundaries.
The energies are computed for h = 3, close to the critical point.  We can see that the aTTN
results in lower energies with respect to the TTN for all bond dimensions m, i.e., the ground
state is represented more accurately.
    With the ability to contain entanglement in the disentangler layer, the aTTNs are capa-
ble of encoding the area law of entanglement in any number of dimensions [25], given that
enough disentanglers are placed over certain bonds.  Nevertheless, increasing the number of
disentanglers increases the computational complexity of the aTTN algorithm, as we discuss in
Sec.4.4.
    The question at hand is:  how does one find the optimal set of disentanglers such that
the aTTN accurately represents the target state?  So far, the algorithm for finding the ground
state of a given Hamiltonian has been developed.  The algorithm details are presented and

                                                       4
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



explained in the following sections.  Note that we are following the procedure introduced in
Refs. [25,26     ]. An alternative approach was presented in the Ref. [27].


3 Ingredients

Before proceeding with the aTTN ground state search algorithm, we provide a short revision
and set the notation for the relevant tensor network objects. In particular, we work with TTNs,
disentanglers, and matrix product operators (MPOs), which represent the Hamiltonian terms,
and the effective operators. For a summary, see the cheat sheet in Fig.2. For a more detailed
description, see Secs.3.1-3.3.





















































                                                          5
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission




















































     Figure  2:   Notation  and  ingredients  for  the  augmented  tree  tensor  network
     (aTTN) cookbook. The colors of the tensor network objects depicted here are used
     consistently in all subsequent figures. Here and throughout, the dashed boxes denote
     the contraction of tensors inside them.

3.1Tree tensor network

A binary TTN ansatz decomposes a wave function into a binary tree structure, as shown with
the black rank-three tensors in Fig.1(a).  Hereafter, we refer to the tensor’s links connected
to the lower layer as the children links, and to the links connected to the upper layer as the
parent links, for a TTN orientation where the bottom layer corresponds to physical sites. The
total number of layers for an N-site system is log2(N)− 1 and each of the open links in the


                                                         6
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



lowest-layer tensors corresponds to a physical site.
    A tensor T  is an isometry over a set of links if contracting T  with T † over the remaining
links yields an identity tensor (Fig.3).










     Figure 3:  Example of an isometry tensor.   When contracted with its Hermitian
     conjugate over the specific links, the isometry tensor T yields an identity.

Every TTN can be isometrized using QR-decompositions such that all the tensors apart from
one are isometries if contracted with their complex conjugates over the right indices. The only
non-isometry tensor in a network is called the isometry center. Isometrizing a tensor network
greatly simplifies the operations in general,  for example,  when computing the expectation
values.   An example is demonstrated in Fig.4for the 2-norm computation,  showing that
computing the norm of an entire TTN corresponds to computing the norm of only the isometry
center tensor. From now on, we mark a tensor with a white cross whenever the isometry center
is labeled explicitly in the tensor network.












     Figure 4:  Computing the 2-norm of an isometrized tree tensor network (TTN)
     reduces to computing the 2-norm of the isometry center tensor.  An example is
     depicted for an eight-site system.  The isometry center of a TTN is marked with a
     white cross, and dashed boxes surround tensors that are being contracted.  When
     isometrized, all the tensors apart from the isometry center are unitary and thus a
     priori known to contract into identities.  Therefore, the norm of the isometry center
     tensor corresponds to the norm of an entire tensor network.

3.2Disentanglers
A disentangler is a two-body unitary gate attached to a pair of sites of the tensor network.
The disentanglers were originally introduced in the context of the multiscale entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA) [14,18     ].  The aTTN is, in fact, a subclass of MERA with one
incomplete disentangler layer.  The restrictions and advice on how to best position the disen-
tanglers in the disentangler layer are explained in Sec.6.1.  We depict disentanglers in the
figures with green rectangles.






                                                        7
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission


3.3Matrix product operators
A matrix product operator (MPO) is matrix product state’s operator counterpart.  A general
MPO is depicted in Fig.5(a) for an example of a four-body system.  There are different ways
an MPO can be represented and implemented, e.g., dense MPOs, sparse MPOs, etc. [32,33     ].
When the operator we want to represent is a sum of n-body terms, MPO =Pα ˆhα, we can store
its MPO as a set of tensor product operator (TPO) terms ˆhα [25]. As described in Sec.4.1, our
aTTN ground state optimization algorithm relies on the TPO representation of the Hamiltonian
MPO. An example of the TPO-representation of a four-body MPO consisting of local and 2-body
terms is shown in Fig.5(b).
    From now on, the TPO representation is implicit for all the MPOs throughout the cook-
book, even if the MPO is for simplicity depicted as a general MPO as in Fig.5a).  Moreover,
all the MPO sites, including the ones on the edges, are depicted with two horizontal links,
one left and one right, even though the edge link may just be a dummy link of dimension
one. Implementation-wise, placing the dummy links on edge MPO sites and keeping the same
number of horizontal links for all MPO sites reduces the number of if-cases in the code and
moreover, allows to handle the case with periodic boundary conditions. In this section, we de-
fine three subtypes of MPOs relevant for the aTTN ground state search algorithm: the Hamil-
tonian, the effective operators, and the environments.






















     Figure 5: Matrix product operators (MPOs). (a) A general four-body MPO. (b) Ex-
     ample of the TPO representation of a four-body MPO, e.g., Hamiltonian, consisting
     of local and two-body terms. The TPO representation implies that an MPO is stored
     as a set of individual terms, i.e., TPO terms.  All local terms acting on the same site
     can always be contracted and stored as a single local term.


3.3.1Matrix product operator for the system Hamiltonian

We consider Hamiltonians with the structure  ˆH  =Pα ˆhα, with ˆhα being n-body terms with
any range.  Here, the choice of a TPO representation is very handy in terms of the flexibility
of writing a Hamiltonian MPO. While the dense or sparse MPO representation can be done by
manually constructing MPO tensors for each Hamiltonian based on case-specific rules, storing
the Hamiltonian term-by-term allows for constructing it directly from the definition of any
model.   The TPO representation encodes the MPO exactly, with no truncation on the level


                                                        8
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



of the Hamiltonian.  Tensors of the Hamiltonian-TPOs are depicted in figures as dark orange
squares or rectangles, see Fig.5.

3.3.2Effective operators
Many tensor network algorithms, such as the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [7]
or the time-dependent variational principle (TDVP) [34,35     ], rely on the computation of the
effective operators, defined as the effective MPO terms which act on a single tensor in a tensor
network.  Given an operator whose expectation value we are computing, the effective opera-
tors are obtained by contracting the surrounding tensor network as in Fig.6on the example
of a TTN. Before the contraction, the isometry center is moved to the tensor whose effective
operators we are computing.  Each tensor in a TTN has three corresponding effective opera-
tors, as illustrated in the last step in Fig.6.  Here, we denote effective operators with yellow
rectangles in the figures. Throughout the paper, referring to the effective operators of an aTTN
implies the effective operators of a corresponding TTN part.












     Figure 6: Obtaining the effective operators of a TTN. The effective operators (yel-
     low) are the effective MPO terms acting on a single tensor in a tensor network state,
     arising during the contraction of the MPO operator (red) expectation value.   The
     figure shows the contraction procedure for obtaining the effective operators of the
     topleft TTN tensor.  The analog procedure is performed to obtain the effective oper-
     ators of any tensor in a TTN, resulting in three effective operators per tensor.  No-
     tice that the MPO terms are the effective operators of the lowest-layer tensors.  The
     dashed rectangles denote the tensor contraction.

It is useful to explain how we handle the effective operators using the TPO structure.  The
contractions as in Fig.6are carried out separately for each TPO term, keeping the TPO struc-
ture until reaching the last stage in Fig.6.  Therefore, the effective operators around a single
tensor consist of a list of TPO terms.   All the TPO terms inside the effective operators are
then passed as an input to a generalized matrix-vector multiplication function required for
the Krylov solver in variational algorithms.  Inside the matrix-vector multiplication function,
each of the input TPO terms is consecutively contracted to the tensor.  The scheme benefits
computationally from the fact that the bond dimension between the TPO tensors inside the
same TPO term is usually equal to one.

3.3.3Environments

We define the environment as the MPO term with one or more uncontracted links pointing
to the child tensor,  unlike the MPO term for effective operators,  whose uncontracted links
point to the parent tensor or to another MPO term. Like the disentanglers, the concept of the
environment originates from the MERA algorithms [18].  The name comes from the fact that
the environment surrounds a tensor or a group of tensors in the network. An example is shown
in Fig.7, where we depict the environment as a turquoise shape.  The environments appear

                                                         9
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



during the contractions in the aTTN optimization algorithm,  alongside effective operators,
TTN tensors, and disentanglers.


















     Figure 7:  An example of the environment tensor in the aTTN. An environment
     tensor is an MPO term with one or more uncontracted child links. In the figure, the
     uncontracted child link points towards the disentangler.


4 Recipe 1: Ground state search

Suppose we are interested in the ground state of the Hamiltonian  ˆH. We find the ground state
energy and ground state by minimizing the energy:


                                        E =〈ψ| ˆH|ψ〉 ; 〈ψ|ψ〉 = 1,                                              (2)
over all the possible states|ψ〉 in a parameter space spanned by a certain ansatz. In our case,
the ansatz is the aTTN|ψaTTN〉, which contains two unknowns to optimize: the disentanglers
D(u) and the TTN|ψTTN〉. The expectation value of the energy〈ψaTTN| ˆH|ψaTTN〉 in graphical
notation is shown in Fig.8.


















     Figure 8:  Expectation value of an MPO with the aTTN ansatz.   In the ground
     state  search,  we  are  minimizing  the  expectation  value  of  the  Hamiltonian  MPO
     〈ψaTTN| ˆH|ψaTTN〉.


                                                        10
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



A standard approach to finding the ground state with tensor networks is the variational DMRG
algorithm, or alternatively, the imaginary time evolution [36] via time evolution algorithms [37].
In the variational DMRG, we minimize the energy contribution of each tensor while all other
are kept constant.  This is a variational procedure, which can be iterated until convergence.
The ground state search for the aTTN consists of a DMRG sweep of the TTN, followed by an
optimization of the disentanglers. Each aTTN optimization sweep is thus split into three parts:

   1.Optimize all disentanglers in    D(u);

   2.Map the Hamiltonian to an auxiliary one     ˆH−→  ˆH′ = D(u) ˆHD†(u);

   3.Run a variational DMRG sweep for finding the optimal TTN state |ψT T N〉 for the auxiliary
       Hamiltonian  ˆH′.

The procedure is iterated, updating the disentanglers and finding a new optimal TTN through-
out the sweeps. In practice, the sweep can be performed without updating the disentanglers.
As we show in Sec.6.2, we obtain the biggest advantage from the disentangler optimization
when running the first sweep without the disentanglers and all the following sweeps, includ-
ing the disentangler optimization. In Secs.4.1-4.3, we explain the first and the second step of
the algorithm, i.e., a technique for finding the optimal disentanglers and the mapping of the
Hamiltonian to an auxiliary one.  For a guide to the variational TTN ground state search, see
the references [2,22,26,38            ].

4.1Optimizing the disentangler layer
We search for the optimal set of disentanglers by optimizing each disentangler uk ∈  D(u)
individually. Suppose that we are optimizing the disentangler uk. The total energy of the state
is obtained by summing up the contributions of every TPO term in a Hamiltonian (Fig.9(a)).
These can be split into two parts:

                                                    X
                                              E =       Epk (uk) + ck.                                                    (3)
                                                     p

As illustrated in Fig.9(b), the first part sums the energy contributions of all the TPO terms
which act on any of the two sites connected to uk, and thus depend on the disentangler, while
the second term contains all remaining TPO terms.  The contribution of the latter is indepen-
dent on uk, and can thus be discarded during the optimization.




















                                                         11
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission
































     Figure 9:  Computing the aTTN energy with a TPO Hamiltonian.  (a) The total
     energy of an aTTN state is obtained by summing up the energy contributions from
     every TPO term in the Hamiltonian.  Here, we illustrate the first three terms in the
     sum on the example of the nearest-neighbour Hamiltonian with two-body interac-
     tions.   (b) We can split the contributions into two parts:  those of the TPO terms
     which act on the disentangler uk shaded with dots (≡ Ek(uk)), and those of the TPO
     terms which do not act on the disentangler (≡ ck). Due to their unitarity, the disen-
     tanglers cancel out if not attached to the TPO term, whose energy contribution we
     are computing.

Now, we recast Pp Epk (uk) as a cost function in a form suitable for the minimization.  The
first step is to contract the tensor network around a single disentangler uk and its Hermitian
conjugate u†k, to obtain a tensor network as in Fig.10.  The surrounding tensors are the left
and the right environment of the disentangler. For now, we skip the details on how to obtain
the environments and focus on the main steps of the algorithm (the procedure is described in
detail in Sec.4.2). If we choose the positions of the disentanglers such that no TPO term in the
Hamiltonian is connected to more than one disentangler, all the remaining disentanglers ui̸=k
contract to identities with their Hermitian conjugates, so the environments do not depend on
any of them. This imposes an important restriction on the positioning of the disentangler: no
Hamiltonian TPO term can be connected to more than one disentangler.  For a discussion of
all restrictions on disentangler positioning, see Sec.6.1.











                                                        12
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission























      Figure 10:  Main steps in the optimization of the disentangler uk.  (a) First, the
      tensor network is contracted into two environments,  Γ lk and Γ rk , as indicated by the
      dashed lines. (b) The tensor network of energy expectation value after the contrac-
      tion, with indicated bond dimensions.

At the stage as in Fig10b), there are both          uk and u†k present in the tensor network. However,
the optimization of uk and u†k simultaneously in this form is a difficult minimization problem.
We describe two possible approaches to optimization:  the self-consistent optimization like
performed in MERA, and an approach based on gradient descent.

4.1.1MERA-like disentangler optimization

This is the approach introduced for the optimization of MERA [18] and used in Refs. [25,26     ]
for aTTNs:  we fix the u†k  and optimize only uk, then solve the problem self-consistently for
a certain number of iterations (Fig.11).  By fixing             u†k, we can contract the tensor network
in Fig.11a) around           uk.  Contracting the environments with u†k and MPOs results in a tensor
network as in Fig.11b), corresponding to an expression of the form:


                                                   E = Tr(ukΓk).                                                          (4)

Here, Γk denotes the global environment obtained by contracting Γ lk, Γ rk , MPO terms, and u†k.
The minimum of Eq. (4) is obtained by choosing    uk =−V U† such that U and V are the unitary
transformations from the singular value decomposition of the global environment Γk = UσV †
Therefore, Eq. (4) simplifies to:

                                                                        X
                                       E = Tr(−V U†UσV †) =−                 σj,                                          (5)
                                                                          j

whereσj≥ 0 are singular values of the global environment matrix.  Once uk  is optimized,
we update the u†k and repeat the contraction in Fig.11to obtain the new              Γk.  We repeat the
procedure until convergence. Notice that there is no need to recalculate the left and the right
environments throughout iterations in the optimization.



                                                          13
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission
























     Figure 11:  MERA-like optimization of the disentangler uk.  We minimize the en-
     ergy  by  fixing  u†k  and  optimize  only  uk,  then  solve  the  problem  self-consistently.
     Starting from (a), the environments  Γ lk  and  Γ rk  and the remaining MPO terms are
     contracted with complex conjugate disentangler u†k, yielding a form suitable for min-
     imization of uk in (b).


4.1.2Disentangler optimization with gradient descent

An alternative approach is optimizing the disentanglers using gradient descent.  In this case,
both uk and u†k can be optimized simultaneously.  We define the cost function as the energy
computed by the complete contraction of a tensor network in Fig.10(b), with elements of           uk
as the variational parameters. The problem is nontrivial because the disentangler must satisfy
the unitarity constraint, u†kuk = 1.  We point out a potential approach using the Riemannian
optimization with the nonlinear conjugate gradient or quasi-Newton algorithms,  shown to
perform successfully for optimizing isometric tensor networks [39].

4.2Details on the environment contractions

This section contains the detailed description of the environment contractions in Fig.10and
Fig.11.  Readers interested only in the high-level description of the algorithm may proceed
directly to Sec.4.3.

4.2.1Obtaining the left and right environment
We identify a unique path through a TTN which connects the two disentangler sites and choose
an anchor tensor along it (Fig.12(a)). We define the left environment as the tensor network
connected to the parent and the left child links, including the anchor, and the right environ-
ment as the tensor network connected to the right child link of the anchor, excluding the anchor
(Fig.12(b)).  Both environments exclude the disentangler and the TPO tensors connected to
the disentangler. Here, we stick to the convention that the anchor is the uppermost left tensor
on the path, but in general, any tensor on the path can be the anchor.






                                                         14
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission































     Figure 12:  Convention for division into the left environment  Γ lk and right envi-
     ronment Γ rk . (a) We first track the path connecting the two disentangler sites through
     the TTN (blue dashed line) and choose the topmost left tensor along the path as the
     anchor (denoted with white anchor). (b) The division into the environments is high-
     lighted with light blue.   The left environment includes the anchor and the tensor
     network contracted to its parent and left child links, and the right environment in-
     cludes the tensor network connected to the right child link of the anchor, excluding
     the anchor.

Performing the contraction to the environments starts with the initial contraction to obtain the
pre-environments, followed by the iterative contraction scheme.  First, we move the isometry
center to the anchor tensor.   Both the left and the right pre-environments are obtained by
performing the steps as in Fig.13.





















                                                         15
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission















     Figure 13: Obtaining the pre-environments. (a) To prepare the network in a shape
     suitable for the iterative contraction scheme, we perform the initial contraction of
     the tensors surrounded with dashed lines.  The disentangler sites are depicted to be
     the neighbouring sites for the simplicity of the picture; in general, they can be on
     distant positions.  (b) The detailed steps of contraction in (a).  We refer to the final
     tensor as the pre-environment.  The procedure is shown for the tree tensor in the
     left environment, but analogous steps are performed for the tree tensor in the right
     environment.

After the pre-contraction, we consider the tensors on the path and build all of their effective
operators. Then, we calculate the full left and right environments by contracting tensors along
the path one by one with the corresponding effective operator (yellow tensor).  One step of
the iteration is shown in Fig.14, and iterations along the path are shown in Fig.15.  Recall
that we only have to do this contraction along the path, as the rest of the network remains
unitary and thus cancels out.

























     Figure 14:  One step of the iterative environment contraction.  (a) The goal is
     to contract the (pre-)environment tensor with the connected tree tensors and the
     effective operator to obtain the new environment of the same link structure.  As an
     iterative procedure, the new environment has the same shape as the input, but has
     absorbed one more layer via contractions.  (b) The detailed steps of the contraction
     in (a).


                                                        16
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission













     Figure 15: Overview of the iterative environment contraction. Contraction steps
     1→ 2 and 3→ 4 imply a contraction as in Fig.14on both left and right environment.
     We start by contracting the lowest tensors on the path (blue dashed lines) and move
     towards the anchor.  By convention, the anchor is included in the left environment.
     In step 2→ 3, we build an effective operator and shift it from the right side of the
     network to the left side for clarity.


4.2.2Contracting to global environment

If we choose the MERA approach to the disentangler optimization, i.e.,fixing u†k and optimizing
uk (Sec.4.1.1), we have to contract the obtained left and right environment with the rest of
the network (Fig.11a)-b)) to obtain the matrix                Γk.  One can think of different ways to carry
out those contractions.  In Fig.16, we show the approach used in the Quantum TEA library,
which minimizes the required memory.  We start by contracting the environments, then the
Hermitian conjugate disentangler, and finally the MPO. The biggest tensor constructed in the
process it the full environment, with a maximum of d4t4 elements.
    Note that optimizing the disentanglers with the gradient descent approach does not re-
quire this step.  Moreover, an important remark regarding the MPO bond dimension t is the
following. As mentioned, the MPO Hamiltonian can be composed of an arbitrary combination
of operators acting on arbitrary sites.  Hence, the bond dimension t cannot be thought of as
an exact dimension of the depicted bonds, but is rather as an approximate measure allowing
us to get a grasp of the computational complexity. In most cases, t is equal to one.




























                                                        17
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission


























     Figure 16: The contraction to the global environment Γk with indicated computa-
     tional complexities of the operations. In the MERA-like disentangler optimization,
     we fix u†k and contract the entire network around uk. By contracting to the final ten-
     sor network, we bring the optimization problem to a form Tr(ukΓk), whose solution
     for uk is known.

4.3Updating the Hamiltonian matrix product operator

After the optimization of the disentangler layer, we contract it to the Hamiltonian. This object
is then used as the Hamiltonian for the following TTN optimization. Here, we describe how to
implement the contraction of the original Hamiltonian  ˆH to a new, auxiliary one  ˆH′ = D ˆHD†.
The procedure is general and can be applied to contracting the disentangler layer to any TPO:

  function CONTRACT DISENTANGLER LAYER(TPO, disentangler layer)
       for TPO term in TPO do
           for disentangler in disentangler layer do
               if TPO term sites and disentangler sites intersect then
                    if every disentangler site is in TPO term sites then
                        contract as in Fig17(a)
                    else
                        contract as in Fig17(b)
                    update the TPO term with the contracted version

Before the contraction, we decompose the disentangler into a two-body term using the QR de-
composition. If the initial TPO term was an n-body term, after the contraction it either remains
a n-body term (scenario Fig.17(a)), or becomes a (          n+1)-body term (scenario Fig.17(b)). The
details of the contraction for a general case are explained in the following subsection.  Note
that contracting the disentangler with a 2-body TPO term increases the bond dimension of the
TPO to at most d2, as indicated in Fig.17. For           n-body TPO terms with n> 2, contracting the
disentanglers in general increases the bond dimension by a factor of d4.
    The increased span and bond dimension of the TPO terms are the reasons why the aTTN
algorithms are more costly with respect to TTN algorithms. Note that this is a constant prefac-


                                                         18
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



tor. The scaling of the computational complexity with the bond dimension m does not change
when going from a TTN to an aTTN.







































     Figure 17: The contraction of the disentanglers with a TPO term for two possible
     cases of the TPO term and the relative position of the disentangler. Depicted in
     the example of a two-body TPO term (as in standard nearest-neighbour Hamiltoni-
     ans) with bond dimensions t.  (a) The disentangler lies fully on the TPO term.  The
     disentanglers are decomposed into two tensors, each of which is contracted with the
     corresponding leg of the TPO. (b) When one disentangler site does not lie on the
     TPO term, we expand it with an identity tensor placed on the extra site. After the QR
     decomposition, the disentangler tensors are contracted with the corresponding legs
     of the TPO. In both (a) and (b), the TPO bond dimension grows to t· d4 immediately
     after the disentangler contraction. However, if the initial TPO term is a two-body, as
     in this example, the bond dimension can always be reduced to d2 using subsequent
     QR decompositions.


4.3.1Contracting the disentangler with a tensor product operator term

The two sites on which the disentangler acts are not restricted to the nearest neighbour sites
in a TTN, as the example in Fig.17shows. Therefore, we need a systematic way to handle the
extra horizontal link connecting the disentangler sites, and propagate it through the new TPO


                                                        19
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



term. After inserting the required identity tensors (see Fig.17(b)), the procedure that handles
the general contraction is:

   1.Contract the left disentangler site to the corresponding TPO term site (Fig.18(a)).

   2.Propagate the horizontal link through the TPO term sites towards the left disentangler
       site position, using a series of QR decompositions (Fig.18(b-e)).

   3.Contract the right disentangler site (Fig.18(f)).

   4.Repeat steps (1-3) for the disentangler’s conjugate.

Steps 1-3 are shown in Fig.18in the example of a four-site TPO term. If using the truncated
SVD decomposition instead of the QR-decomposition, we must ensure that the TPO term’s
isometry center is always at the tensor we are decomposing via SVD.




























     Figure 18: Steps for contracting the disentangler to a TPO term and propagating
     the link.  Depicted in an example of a four-body TPO term.  (a) Contracting the left
     disentangler site.  (b-e) Propagation of the horizontal links with the QR decomposi-
     tions.  (f) Contracting the right disentangler site.  (g) The resulting TPO term after
     the contraction with the disentangler.  The same procedure is applied to the disen-
     tangler’s conjugate.

4.4Computational complexity overview

We consider one sweep of the aTTN ground state search.  The analysis of the computational
complexity is split into two parts: the optimization of the disentangler layer and the variational
ground state search with the auxiliary Hamiltonian  ˆH′  =  D(u) ˆHD†(u).   As in the previous
chapters, N is the total number of sites, m is the maximal bond dimension of the TTN, d is the
local Hilbert space dimension, and t is the MPO bond dimension.



                                                         20
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



4.4.1Complexity of the optimization of the disentangler layer
Each step of the iterative environment contraction (Fig.14) scales as        O(m4d2).  Taking into
account that the number of iterations is proportional to the number of layers in a TTN, which
grows logarithmically with the system size, the overall complexity is O(log(N)· m4d2).  The
contraction to the global environment Γk (Fig.16) is        O(m2d4)+O(d6), and the cost of the SVD
for Γk is O((d2)3) = O(d6). Let us define ND as the total number of disentanglers in the disen-
tangler layer.  The procedure needs to be repeated for every disentangler and the MERA-like
disentangler optimization takes Ni iterations until convergence. Therefore, the total cost of the
disentangler layer optimization isO(ND·log(N)·m4d2)+O(ND·Ni·m2d4)+O(ND·Ni·d6). More-
over, assuming that d≪ m and Nid2≪ m2, the expression can be reduced toO(ND·log(N)·m4d2).
In practice, this part is not the bottleneck of the simulation, as it has a much smaller constant
prefactor.

4.4.2Complexity of the variational ground state search with the auxiliary Hamiltonian

A full sweep in the variational ground state search consists of computing the effective opera-
tors for each tensor, and solving the local eigenproblem with the Lanczos algorithm. The total
computational cost reflects the cost of the local matrix-vector multiplication performed at each
iteration of the Lanczos algorithm.  This corresponds to the contraction of three effective op-
erators with an order-three tensor as in Fig.19.  For a dense MPO of bond dimension           t, this
cost is O(m4t3).
    In the TPO picture, each of the steps in Fig.19needs to be performed sequentially for
each TPO term.  The complexity thus depends on the individual TPO bond dimension t and
the number of TPO terms in a single effective operator. Typically, the number of TPO terms in
an effective operator scales linearly with the length of the lattice side L in an L× L system.
While in the TTN algorithm each TPO term has a bond dimension t  = 1, this might not be
the case for the aTTN. The original Hamiltonian is contracted with the disentangler layer,
which adds a factor of d2 to the bond dimension for two-body Hamiltonian terms, or d4 for
n-body Hamiltonian terms, to each TPO link over which the disentangler is placed. Therefore,
the difference in computational cost between the TTN and the aTTN algorithms scales only
with the local dimension d.  The exact factor depends on the model and the positions of the
disentanglers in the lattice.








     Figure 19: Computational cost of applying the effective operators to a tree tensor
     in the Lanczos algorithm. The figure shows steps of contracting the three effective
     operators to a tree tensor with indicated bond dimensions. The complete contraction
     is carried out with the computational cost of O(m4t3).


5 Recipe 2: Measurement of observables

Performing the measurement of local observables and n-body correlators of an aTTN draws
the logic from the TTN measurement to a large extent.  For this reason, we discuss both the
logic behind the TTN case and highlight the differences to the aTTN measurements.


                                                       21
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission


5.1Measuring local versus non-local observables with tree tensor networks
Suppose that we want to measure an observable that is a product of local operators on an
arbitrary number of sites, in arbitrary positions. In general, it is possible to construct a flexible
procedure for measuring the expectation value of any n-body operator.  For the local observ-
ables specifically, i.e., an expectation value of a single-site operator, we construct an efficient
computation with the reduced density matrices, as depicted in Fig.20(a).  When a TTN is
isometrized towards the lowest-layer tensor corresponding to the site i, the isometry center
tensor contracted with its complex conjugate represents the reduced density matrixρi of site
i (see Fig.20). The value of the local operator on this site is then straightforwardly computed
by contracting the reduced density matrix as in Fig.20(a).  It is enough to compute the re-
duced density matrices at a certain site once and keep them stored for measuring as many
local observables as required.
    Apart from the specific case of local observable measurement, all the other n-body observ-
ables (with n> 1) are measured by contracting the tensor network representing the expec-
tation value, as shown in Fig.20(b).  Even the measurement of           n-body observables benefits
from the isometrization, as it is sufficient to contract only the sub-tree containing all of the
sites over which the n-body observable spans.

5.2Measurement of an observable with the augmented tree tensor network
In the case of an aTTN, the computation of an expectation value needs to include the disen-
tanglers:


         〈ˆo〉aTTN =〈ψaTTN| ˆo|ψaTTN〉 =〈ψTTN| D(u) ˆo D†(u)|ψTTN〉≡〈ψTTN| ˆo′|ψTTN〉 ,       (6)

This is a specific case of D(u) and D†(u) being connected to an MPO, which we discussed in
Sec.4.3.  We perform the measurement by contracting the TPO term             ˆo with the disentangler
layer, ˆo′ = DˆoD†, just as we did with the Hamiltonian terms in the ground state search. Then,
we measure  ˆo′  on the TTN part of the aTTN. In Sec.5.3,  we discuss in detail the specific
example of a two-body correlation matrix, which is a commonly measured observable.



























                                                        22
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



































     Figure 20: Measuring the expectation value of local and non-local operators with
     a TTN. (a) Measuring a local operator〈ˆolocal〉. By shifting the isometry center to the
     tensor of a physical site i with a local term, computing the expectation value reduces
     to the contraction of the local operator with the tensors of the isometry center, i.e.,
     with the reduced density matrixρi. (b) Measuring a non-local operator depicted on
     the example of a three-body term〈ˆonon−local〉. Computing the expectation value can
     still, to some extent, benefit from isometrization.  We need to perform the explicit
     contraction only for the sub-tree that contains the sites over which the non-local
     observable spans.

5.3Two-body correlation measurement

Suppose we want to measure the two-body correlation composed of observables ˆoa and ˆob.
The output of this measurement for a system consisting of N  sites is the N× N  correlation
matrix C:
                                            〈ˆoa                            
                                                 1ˆob1〉 〈ˆoa1ˆob2〉        ...
                                                                      

                                      C =     〈ˆoa1ˆob2〉       ...           ....                                          (7)


                                                 ...           ...  〈ˆoaN ˆobN〉

The subscripts denote the site on which the operator is acting. We treat each of the elements
of the matrix C as a TPO term whose expectation value we are computing. In the correlation


                                                          23
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



matrix C, we distinguish between two types of terms:  the diagonal terms〈ˆoai ˆobi〉, and off-
diagonal terms〈ˆoai ˆobj〉, i̸= j. The diagonal terms are, by definition, local. After the contraction
with the disentangler layer, they can either stay local or grow to a two-body term (Fig.21(a)).
The off-diagonal terms are two-body terms. After the contraction with the disentangler layer,
they can either stay two-body terms, or grow to three- or four-body terms (Fig.21(b)).  The
measurement procedure is summarized in Fig.22for both the TTN and the aTTN.


































     Figure 21:  Different outcomes of contracting the disentanglers with local and
     two-body terms.  (a) Contracting the disentangler layer with the local terms.  The
     outcome of the contraction is either a local or a two-body term.  (b) Contraction of
     the disentangler layer with the two-body terms.  The outcome of the contraction is
     either a two-body, a three-body, or a four-body term, depending on the number of
     disentanglers they connect to.

















                                                         24
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission




























     Figure 22: Overview of the measurement of the two-body correlation matrix for
     a TTN versus an aTTN. Diagonal terms refer to terms〈ˆoai ˆobi〉, and off-diagonal terms
     refer to terms〈ˆoai ˆobj〉, i̸= j in the correlation matrix in Eq. (7).


6 Tips for serving

The sections up to now cover a theoretical guide of the algorithms for the optimization and
the measurements.  Next, we give some advice and insights into the algorithm’s performance
for different parameters. Namely, we discuss the optimal strategy for positioning the disentan-
glers and the restrictions in placing them.  Then, we compare the performance of the ground
state search for MPS, TTN, and aTTN with different bond dimensions, for different system
sizes and at different points in a phase diagram.  We proceed with the analysis of the results
for different numbers of sweeps with disentangler optimization.   All results presented fur-
ther are obtained using the Quantum TEA software package.  Simulations are performed on
CINECA’s HPC LEONARDO, equipped with NVIDIA Ampere A100 GPU and Intel Xeon Platinum
8358 CPU processors. We performed 30 DMRG sweeps for each ground state search. Prior to
optimization, all the disentanglers are initialized as identities.  To simulate two-dimensional
systems, we map the model onto an equivalent one-dimensional one using the Hilbert curve
mapping pattern [40].
    The models we use for benchmarking are the quantum Ising model on a square lattice
and the Heisenberg model on a triangular lattice, both with open boundary conditions.  The
Hamiltonian of the quantum Ising model is
                                                X                 X       !
                                     ˆH =−J           σixσ jx− h      σiz   ,                                          (8)
                                                 <i j>              i
whereσi{x,y,z} are the Pauli operators acting on site i,< i j> denotes the nearest-neighbour
sites, h is the external field, and we take J as the energy unit.  For a two-dimensional square
lattice, the model undergoes a quantum phase transition with the critical point at hc≈ 3.044


                                                       25
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



in the thermodynamic limit [41].
    The triangular lattice Heisenberg model is an example of a frustrated model, described
with the Hamiltonian                        X                                
                                    ˆH = J        σixσ jx +σiyσ jy +σizσ jz     ,                                        (9)
                                           <i j>
where< i j> denotes the nearest-neighbour sites and J is the energy unit. Again, we set J = 1
as the energy unit.

6.1Positioning the disentanglers

The number of disentanglers and their positions influence the accuracy and the runtime of
the aTTN optimization.  We first explain restrictions on placing the disentanglers, and then
proceed to describe the strategy for optimal positioning.

6.1.1Restrictions on positioning the disentanglers

We pose two general restrictions on disentangler positioning:

   1.  The same TPO (Hamiltonian interaction) term cannot have more than one disen-
       tangler attached to it (Fig.23(a)). As explained in Sec.4.1, this restriction is inherent
       to the optimization algorithm.

   2.  The disentangler should not support untruncated links, i.e., links whose maximal
       possible bond dimension is smaller than the maximal bond dimension m set in the simu-
       lation (Fig.23(b)). This restriction is not prohibited by the algorithm construction, but
       rather prevents us from placing the disentanglers on positions that cannot give a gain
       in energy.  Note that this implies that a disentangler cannot be placed on the sites that
       share the same lowest-layer tensor.
































                                                        26
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission

































     Figure 23: Restrictions on the disentangler positioning.  (a) The same TPO term
     cannot have more than one disentangler attached to it: examples of forbidden and al-
     lowed disentangler configurations. The condition needs to be satisfied for every TPO
     term in a Hamiltonian.  (b) We avoid placing disentanglers on positions that cannot
     give a gain in energy because the connecting TTN links already have the maximal
     possible bond dimension.  For a 16-site TTN, we mark the maximal possible TTN
     bond dimensions (left) and bond dimensions after truncation (right), for example,
     when d2< m< d4, m being the maximal bond dimension set in a simulation. Below,
     we show examples of forbidden and allowed configurations.


6.1.2Automatic disentangler positioning

An analysis carried out in Ref. [25] has shown that for an L× L system with a translationally
symmetrical Hamiltonian,  a successful strategy for positioning the disentanglers can be to
place as many disentanglers as possible to support the highest-layer link.  These are the links
that usually support the largest amount of entanglement.  Our strategy is to loop over all of
the possible disentangler positions, starting from the ones supporting the highest-layer link,
and accept the positions which lie fully on at least one Hamiltonian interaction term (see
Fig.24), and do not violate any of the restrictions from Sec.6.1.1. An example of the resulting
disentangler layer is shown in Fig.25for a 32   × 32 lattice and the quantum Ising model from
Eq. (8).










                                                        27
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission












     Figure 24:  An example of disentangler positions with respect to a single inter-
     action term. In the left example, the disentangler lies fully on the interaction term.
     In the right example, it does not. Our results show that a successful strategy for po-
     sitioning the disentanglers is to place only those that lie fully on at least one of the
     interaction terms in the Hamiltonian.


























     Figure 25: Positions of the disentanglers for 32×32 lattice quantum Ising model,
     placed according to the strategy described in text.  The lattice sites and the un-
     derlying Hilbert curve mapping are represented with gray dots and lines, and the
     disentanglers are marked with green.  The red and orange lines cut the highest and
     second-highest layer links of a TTN, respectively.

Keeping only the terms that lie fully on a single interaction term reduces the simulation runtime
and also gives a significantly lower energy, as demonstrated in Fig.26.  We show how the
resulting energy densityϵ  =  E/L2  (Fig.26(a)) and runtime (Fig.26(b)) depend on the
number of disentanglers computed for the 32× 32 quantum Ising model close to the critical
point. Outside of the dark violet region, we place the disentanglers according to the described
strategy, allowing only the positions that lie fully on at least one interaction term.  The dark
violet region shows the regime in which we keep placing the remaining disentanglers, starting
once again from the highest-layer bonds, but including also those which do not fully lie on any
interaction term.  As soon as the latter regime is entered, we clearly see both a jump in the
optimized energy value and in the computational time.



                                                         28
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission

















     Figure 26: Ground state search for the quantum Ising model on a 32×32 square
     lattice, with a varying number of disentanglers in the disentangler layer, nDE.
     We use bond dimension m = 60 and choose the external field value h = 3, close to
     the critical point. (a) Ground state energy densityϵ as a function of nDE. The black
     dotted line marks the minimum obtained energy density.   (b) The corresponding
     runtime as a function of nDE. The simulations are run on a GPU. In both plots, the blue
     dashed line corresponds to the TTN data obtained with the same bond dimension. A
     given number of the disentanglers nDE is placed by prioritizing positions according
     to the strategy described in the text.  Outside the dark violet region, we place only
     the disentanglers that lie fully on at least one interaction term of the Hamiltonian.
     Inside the dark violet region, we include additional disentanglers that do not lie fully
     on any interaction term. We observe a sudden decrease in accuracy and an increase
     in runtime as soon as the dark violet region is entered.

6.2Comparison to matrix product states and tree tensor networks

We benchmark the accuracy of the ground state search for two-dimensional models for differ-
ent ansätze.  We start with the quantum Ising model defined in Eq. (8) on a 32 × 32 square
lattice and then proceed to the Heisenberg model on a triangular lattice defined in Eq. (9).

6.2.1Quantum Ising model on a square lattice
Fig.27(a) shows the difference between the energy densities obtained with the TTN and the
aTTN for different values of the transverse field h.  The bond dimension is fixed to m = 100.
We see that the region in which the aTTN gives the largest advantage is close to the critical
point hc∼ 3. This is where the state’s entanglement is the largest, and the model is usually the
most demanding to simulate. For h≈ 1, in the bulk of the phase, the area law is obeyed. The
obtained results are already converged with the TTN within 10−7 in energy density (Fig.27
(b)). The difference between the TTN and aTTN energy densities is therefore small.
















                                                       29
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission

















     Figure 27:  The comparison between the TTN and the aTTN for the quantum
     Ising model on a 32× 32 lattice for varying external field h and a fixed bond
     dimension.   (a) The difference between the TTN and aTTN ground state energy
     densities,ϵTTN−ϵaTTN, for bond dimension m = 100.  (b) The convergence of the
     TTN energy densityϵTTN at h = 1.  The plot shows the difference between the TTN
     energy density at bond dimension m and the TTN energy density at m = 400, plotted
     as a function of inverse bond dimension 1/m.  The results imply that far away from
     the criticality, values in (a) are converged within approximately 10−7.

    While in Fig.27we have shown that the aTTN always gives an advantage in accuracy for
a fixed bond dimension, the required memory and runtime are larger compared to TTN and
MPS. Since the amount of computational resources is limited in practice, the following bench-
mark compares the performance of the aTTN with the TTN and the MPS across different bond
dimensions. We evaluate the accuracy, the runtime, and the peak memory allocated on a GPU.
The latter is measured with the PyTorch function torch.cuda.max_memory_allocated().
The largest bond dimension shown corresponds to the largest possible with the assigned mem-
ory resources. Each simulation is assigned 4 CPU cores with a total of 450 GB RAM and a GPU
of 64 GB. A GPU offers a significant speedup [42], but poses a limitation in terms of available
memory. To balance between those two, we utilize the mixed device mode available in Quan-
tum TEA: during the DMRG sweep, only the isometry center tensor and the corresponding
effective operators are stored on a GPU, thus all the operations involving these tensors are car-
ried out on a GPU. This includes solving the local eigenproblem with the Lanczos algorithm.
All remaining operations, including the disentangler optimization for the aTTN, is carried out
on a CPU host.  This way, we perform only the computationally most demanding steps on a
GPU, while the rest is kept on a CPU host.
    Fig.28shows the performance of the different ansätze on the quantum Ising model in a
L× L square lattice for L = 16, 32 at h = 3, where the biggest advantage of aTTNs is expected
according to Fig.27(a). The presented runtimes for the aTTN ground state search include the
disentangler optimization.  Since the longest simulation runtime is∼ 12 hours, the limiting
factor preventing us from reaching higher bond dimensions with the aTTN and the TTN is
primarily the limited memory on the GPU. MPS simulations are, on the other hand, primarily
limited by the memory requirement on the CPU. This difference arises because the size of the
MPS tensors is m2d in contrast to m3 in the TTN and the aTTN. As a result, a fixed amount
of GPU memory can store MPS tensors and their associated Lanczos tensors at significantly
higher bond dimensions than those feasible for the TTN and the aTTN. The bottleneck thus
shifts from GPU to CPU resources, which are required to store the rest of the tensor network
and effective operators.





                                                      30
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission




























     Figure 28: Ground state search benchmark for the quantum Ising model on L× L
     square lattice at transverse field h = 3;  comparison between MPS, TTN, and
     aTTN.. For L = 16: (a) ground state energy densitiesϵ as a function of bond dimen-
     sion m and (b) as a function of the runtime.  (c) Maximal allocated GPU memory
     during the simulation. For L = 32: (d) ground state energy densitiesϵ as a function
     of bond dimension m and (e) as a function of the runtime.  (f) Maximal allocated
     GPU memory during the simulation.

For  L = 16, we find that MPS performs slightly better than TTN and aTTN at the maximal
reachable bond dimension  m (Fig.28(a)).   All three energy densities are within 10    −5  dif-
ference.   By comparing the energy density over runtime (Fig.28(b)),  we find very similar
performance between all three ansätze.  However, as we increase the lattice size to L = 32, a
clear separation emerges, with the aTTN performing the best (Figs.28(d) and (e)).
    The underlying reason is that when mapped to a 1D tensor network, larger lattices produce
more long-range interactions.  These are handled better by the TTN’s hierarchical structure
compared to the MPS. However, at L = 16, the MPS is still able to compensate by reaching
a larger bond dimension due to the better scaling in memory.  The main factor affecting the
difference between aTTN and TTN is the number of disentanglers, with a larger lattice al-
lowing to place more of them.  As discussed in Sec.6.1.2, placing more disentanglers leads
to greater energy improvement in aTTN. As a result, the tradeoff between additional cost in
aTTN memory resources and gained precision shifts:  for  L = 16, the benefit of adding dis-
entanglers does not outweigh the increase in required resources, whereas for L = 32, where
significantly more disentanglers can be employed, the precision gain justifies the additional
memory requirement.
    The peak memory allocated on a GPU during the simulation (Figs.28(c) and (f)) clearly
exhibits polynomial scaling with bond dimension m for all three ansatze.  The scaling under-
lines the size of the tensors in the Lanczos algorithm for each ansätze: O(m2) for MPS and
O(m3) for both TTN and aTTN (Fig.19). On the GPU, we store only the isometry center ten-
sor, Lanczos tensors, and the corresponding effective operators; thus, this behaviour precisely
reproduces the theoretical expectation.  We obtain the scaling coefficients by fitting the peak
memory to a polynomial A· mα, with the precise values obtained for A andα shown in Table1.

                                                       31
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



The difference between the TTN and the aTTN is in a proportionality factor A, with the aTTN
simulations requiring roughly 6.5 times more GPU memory with respect to the TTN for L = 16
and 9.8 times more for  L  = 32.  The increased prefactor is a consequence of the increased
bond dimension of the TPO terms in the auxiliary Hamiltonian after the contraction of the
disentangler layer.  This contrasts with the TTN, where all Hamiltonian TPO terms maintain
a bond dimension of one.  Moreover, the larger prefactor for L = 32 with respect to L = 16
directly reflects the increased number of TPO terms in a single effective operator in the larger
system (discussed in Sec.4.4.2).

                                      MPS                       TTN                       aTTN
          L = 16         A    (5.7± 0.3)· 10−6          (7.7± 0.2)· 10−7          (5.06± 0.09)· 10−6
                         α      1.950± 0.007              2.966± 0.005               2.973± 0.003
          L = 32         A    (1.9± 0.1)· 10−5         (1.13± 0.03)· 10−6         (1.10± 0.04)· 10−5
                         α        1.98± 0.01              2.978± 0.004               2.962± 0.008

     Table 1:  Memory scaling coefficients for quantum Ising model on L× L square
     lattice.  Obtained scaling coefficients when fitting the values of maximal allocated
     GPU memory (in GB) to a polynomial A· mα.

    Altogether, when considering fixed computational resources, the aTTN gives an advantage
for large enough lattice sizes. To further identify the Hamiltonian parameter regimes in which
this advantage persists, for  L  = 32 we compare the best possible result for aTTN and TTN
across different values of the external field.   The best energy values are obtained at bond
dimension m = 160 for aTTN and m = 400 for TTN. The resulting energies for MPS are higher
than both TTN and aTTN in the entire parameter range.
    We plot the difference between the best obtained energy density for the TTN and the aTTN
in Fig.29.  The background colors denote which ansatz gives the best accuracy at the corre-
sponding external field value, yellow denoting the TTN, and red denoting the aTTN. The TTN
is more successful in the bulk of the phase where the state is less entangled, while the aTTN
becomes advantageous when the state becomes more entangled close to the critical point. This
happens because the correlations in the system grow as the critical point is approached, reach-
ing the regime in which the high-layer TTN links become saturated. Placing the disentangler
over high-layer links allows us to capture long-range correlations more accurately.













     Figure 29: The difference between the best obtained TTN and aTTN energy den-
     sity with given memory resources for L = 32 quantum Ising model.  The differ-
     ence is plotted across different external fields. Background color denotes the ansatz
     for which the lower energy was obtained, yellow for a TTN and red for an aTTN. The
     bond dimensions are m = 400 for TTN and m = 160 for aTTN.



                                                       32
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



6.2.2Heisenberg model on a triangular lattice
As for the quantum Ising model, we compare the accuracy and computational cost of aTTN
with TTN and MPS across different bond dimensions for the Heisenberg model (Eq. (9)) on
a triangular  L× L  lattice.   Fig.30shows the results for            L  =  16 and  L  =  32.   This model
is geometrically frustrated and is shown to be among the most challenging models for the
variational ground state search [43].  We thus expect a large amount of entanglement in the
ground state.  The red line in Fig.30(a) marks the lowest energy density value shown in the
collection of benchmarks in Ref. [43], obtained using the recurrent neural network (RNN)
wave function [44].
    The best performance with given resources for L = 16 is again obtained by MPS. It provides
the highest overall accuracy at bond dimension m = 1200 (Fig.30(a)), as well as the smallest
runtime at fixed accuracy (Fig.30(b)). However, both the best performance and accuracy for
L = 32 are obtained by TTN (Figs.30(c) and (d)). Therefore, with given resources, the aTTN
does not outperform other ansätze for this model.  We attribute this to two key factors.  First,
because of the geometry of the lattice, the total number of interaction terms in the Heisenberg
model is nine times larger than in the quantum Ising model. This means that more interaction
terms will have an increased bond dimension after the disentangler layer is applied to the
Hamiltonian MPO. This increases the prefactor in the aTTN’s memory scaling with respect to
the TTN and the MPS (recall Sec.4.4.2), supported by the analysis of the peak GPU memory
below.  The largest bond dimension we could reach with the aTTN is m = 100.  Second, the
triangular lattice with nearest-neighbour interactions imposes stricter geometric constraints on
the placement of disentanglers compared to the square lattice, resulting in a smaller number
of viable disentangler positions.  Specifically, the triangular lattice nearest-neighbour model
is equivalent to a model with next-to-nearest-neighbour interactions along one diagonal on a
square lattice.  This limits the number of disentangler positions due to the constraint that no
more than one disentangler can be assigned to a single interaction (TPO) term (Sec.6.1.1).

































                                                        33
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission




























     Figure 30: Ground state search benchmark for triangular Heisenberg model on
     L×L triangular lattice; comparison between MPS, TTN and aTTN. For L = 16: (a)
     ground state energy density as a function of bond dimensions. The red line marks, up
     to our knowledge, the best-known variational benchmark obtained with the recurrent
     neural network (RNN) wave function, taken from Refs. [43,44     ].  (b) Ground state
     energy density as a function of the corresponding runtime.  (c) Maximal allocated
     GPU memory during the simulation. For L = 32: (d) ground state energy density as
     a function of bond dimensions and (e) as a function of corresponding runtime.  (f)
     Maximal allocated GPU memory during the simulation.

    As in the case of quantum Ising model, the peak memory allocated on a GPU during the
simulation (Figs.30(c) and (f)) scales approximately as         O(m2) for MPS and O(m3) for both
TTN and aTTN. We obtain the scalings by fitting the memory values to a polynomial A·mα, with
the precise values obtained for A andα shown in Table2. We find that the aTTN simulations
require roughly 8.7 times more GPU memory with respect to the TTN for  L = 16 and 10.9
times for L = 32.  The prefactor A is larger with respect to the quantum Ising model for both
system sizes.

                                    MPS                      TTN                         aTTN
        L = 16         A    (7.8± 0.4)· 10−6        (1.93± 0.07)· 10−6         (1.675± 0.0.05)· 10−5
                       α      1.961± 0.008             2.973± 0.007                 2.958± 0.008
        L = 32         A    (1.8± 0.2)· 10−5         (3.6± 0.2)· 10−6             (3.9± 0.2)· 10−5
                       α        1.99± 0.02             2.974± 0.009                 2.940± 0.009

     Table 2: Memory scaling coefficients for Heisenberg model on L× L triangular
     lattice.  Obtained scaling coefficients when fitting the values of maximal allocated
     GPU memory (in GB) to a polynomial A· mα.

    A reduction in the required memory of the aTTN could be achieved by compressing mul-
tiple Hamiltonian TPO which act on the same site, e.g., for the triangular Heisenberg those

                                                      34
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



would beσxσx,σyσy, andσzσz. This would produce TPO terms with a larger bond dimen-
sion. However, after the contraction with the disentangler layer, the compressed Hamiltonian
TPO terms with fully overlapping disentanglers would result in one term with bond dimension
d2, instead of multiple terms with bond dimension d2 as in the case without compression. We
leave this for future work.

6.3Disentangler optimization gain across sweeps

Finally,  we tune the disentangler optimization across the DMRG sweeps.   In particular,  we
perform STTN  sweeps of DMRG on the TTN without the disentangler layer,  and after that,
start optimizing the disentangler layer in every sweep.   The total number of sweeps in all
simulations is 30 and the simulations were performed fully on a GPU. The benchmark results
for the quantum Ising model at h = 3 for 32× 32 lattice are shown in Fig.31.  The results
show that the optimal scenario is performing the first sweep with TTN only and the rest with
the disentangler layer optimization,  i.e.,  STTN  =  1.   This implies that,  when starting from
an already optimized TTN, the disentangler optimization is not able to escape from a local
minimum.
















     Figure 31: Ground state search benchmark for quantum Ising model on 32× 32
     square lattice for different number of initial DMRG sweeps without the disen-
     tangler layer, STTN. After STTN sweeps, the disentangler layer is optimized in every
     sweep.  The total number of sweeps is always 30.  The plots show (a) ground state
     energy densityϵ and the corresponding runtime (b) as a function of STTN at external
     field h = 3 and bond dimension m = 100.


7 Conclusion

We described the aTTN algorithms for the ground state search and the measurement of observ-
ables in detail. The steps presented here follow the implementation in Quantum TEA [28], an
open-source tensor network software package.  We benchmarked the ground state search for
different hyperparameters on the quantum Ising model on a square lattice of 32×32 spins. We
described the optimal strategy for the placement of disentanglers, and showed that the best
accuracy is obtained when the disentangler layer optimization is performed in every sweep,
starting after the first DMRG sweep on a TTN.
    Furthermore, we performed large-scale ground state search simulations utilizing GPUs to
compare the performance of the aTTN to the TTN and the MPS for a square lattice quantum
Ising model and a triangular lattice Heisenberg model. Our results demonstrate that the aTTN
consistently improves ground state energy estimates at fixed bond dimension.   The largest

                                                      35
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



gains appear near the critical point, as demonstrated for the 2D quantum Ising model.  To
identify the parameter regimes where the aTTNs offer advantages over the MPS and the TTN
in accuracy relative to computational cost, we performed the simulations across a wide range
of bond dimensions,  with the largest bond dimension being the largest possible given the
assigned memory resources. On both the Ising and the Heisenberg models, we confirmed that
the memory cost of the aTTN retains the same polynomial scaling with the bond dimension as
the TTN, but with a different constant prefactor.
    We find that the aTTN is advantageous for large lattices, where it is possible to place a
large number of disentanglers, and close to the critical point, where the disentanglers help
capture the long-range correlations.  While the advantageous regime is readily in reach for
the Ising model on a square lattice, we find that the aTTN does not outperform the TTN and
the MPS for the Heisenberg model on the triangular lattice.  The main limitation is given by
the memory cost of the aTTN algorithm. This is especially apparent in the Heisenberg model,
where the large number of interaction terms amplify the memory overhead post-disentangler
application. We think this could be improved by using the compression of Hamiltonian terms.
The regime of the utility of the aTTN can be expanded further by distributing the simulations
over multiple GPUs. Finally, while up to now we have constructed the optimization scheme for
finding the aTTN ground state, the next expected step is extending the aTTN algorithm scope
towards the time evolution.


Data and code availability

All the simulations are performed using the Quantum TEA libraries [28].   The benchmark
datasets are available on Zenodo [45] and figures are available on the Figshare repository [46].
The simulation setup with Quantum TEA is provided within the repository [29].


Acknowledgments

We acknowledge Flavio Baccari and Timo Felser for useful discussions.  The research lead-
ing to these results has received funding from the following organizations:  European Union
via UNIPhD programme (Horizon 2020 under Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No.
101034319 and NextGenerationEU), Italian Research Center on HPC, Big Data and Quantum
Computing (NextGenerationEU Project No.  CN00000013), project EuRyQa (Horizon 2020),
project PASQuanS2 (Quantum Technology Flagship);  Italian Ministry of University and Re-
search (MUR) via: Quantum Frontiers (the Departments of Excellence 2023-2027); the World
Class Research Infrastructure - Quantum Computing and Simulation Center (QCSC) of Padova
University; Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN): iniziativa specifica IS-QUANTUM. We
acknowledge computational resources from Cineca on the Leonardo machine.


References

 [1]  S. Montangero,  Introduction to Tensor Network Methods:  Numerical simulations of low-
      dimensional many-body quantum systems, Springer (2018).

 [2]  P. Silvi, F. Tschirsich, M. Gerster, J. Jünemann, D. Jaschke, M. Rizzi and S. Montangero,
      The Tensor Networks Anthology:  Simulation techniques for many-body quantum lattice
      systems, SciPost Physics Lecture Notes 8 (2019), doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhysLectNotes.8.


                                                      36
 SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



 [3]  M. C. Bañuls,  Tensor Network Algorithms:  A Route Map,  Annual Review of Condensed
      Matter Physics 14(1), 173 (2023), doi:10.1146      /annurev-conmatphys-040721-022705.

 [4]  S. Östlund and S. Rommer,   Thermodynamic Limit of Density Matrix Renormalization,
      Physical Reviev Letters 75(19) (1995), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.75.3537.

 [5]  G. Vidal, Efficient Classical Simulation of Slightly Entangled Quantum Computations, Phys-
      ical Review Letters 91(14) (2003), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.91.147902.

 [6]  F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Matrix product states represent ground states faithfully, Phys-
      ical Review B 73(094423) (2006), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.73.094423.

 [7]  U. Schollwöck,   The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product
      states, Annals of Physics 326(1), 96 (2011), doi:10.1016      /j.aop.2010.09.012.

 [8]  M. B. Hastings,  An area law for one-dimensional quantum systems,  Journal of Statistical
      Mechanics 2007(P08024) (2007), doi:10.1088      /1742-5468/2007/08/P08024.

 [9]  I. Arad, A. Kitaev, Z. Landau and U. Vazirani, An area law and sub-exponential algorithm
      for 1D systems, arXiv preprint (2013), doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1301.1162.

[10]  M. Eisert, Jens Cramer and M. B. Plenio,  Colloquium:  Area laws for the entanglement
      entropy, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82(277) (2010), doi:10.1103      /RevModPhys.82.277.

[11]  F.   Verstraete   and   J.   I.   Cirac,        Renormalization   algorithms   for   Quantum-Many
      Body  Systems  in  two  and  higher  dimensions,       arXiv:cond-mat/0407066  (2004),
      doi:10.48550      /arXiv.cond-mat/0407066.

[12]  F. Verstraete, M. M. Wolf, D. Pérez-García and J. I. Cirac,  Criticality, the Area law, and
      the  Computational  Power  of  Projected  Entangled  Pair  States,    Physical  Review  Letters
      96(220601) (2006), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.96.220601.

[13]  J. I. Cirac, D. Pérez-García, N. Schuch and F. Verstraete,  Matrix product states and pro-
      jected entangled pair states: Concepts, symmetries, theorems,  Reviews of Modern Physics
      93(045003) (2021), doi:10.1103      /RevModPhys.93.045003.

[14]  G. Vidal,  Entanglement Renormalization,  Physical Review Letters 93(220405) (2007),
      doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.99.220405.

[15]  G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, Quantum Criticality with the Multi-scale Entanglement Renormal-
      ization Ansatz, chapter in a book Strongly Correlated Systems, Springer, doi:10.1007      /978-
      3-642-35106-8_4(2013).

[16]  M. Lubasch, J. I. Cirac and M.-C. Bañuls,  Algorithms for finite projected entangled pair
      states, Phys. Rev. B 90(064425) (2014), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.90.064425.

[17]  D. A. Puente, E. L. Weerda, K. Schröder and M. Rizzi, Efficient optimization and conceptual
      barriers in variational finite Projected Entangled-Pair states,  Phys. Rev. B 111(195120)
      (2025), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.111.195120.

[18]  G. Evenbly and G. Vidal,  Algorithms for entanglement renormalization,  Physical Review
      B 79(144108) (2009), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.79.144108.

[19]  G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, Entanglement Renormalization in Two Spatial Dimensions, Phys-
      ical Review Letters 102(180406) (2009), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.102.180406.



                                                        37
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



[20]  Y.   Shi,   L.   Duan   and   G.   Vidal,        Classical   simulation   of   quantum   many-body
       systems   with   a   tree   tensor   network,       Physical   Review   A   74(022320)   (2006),
       doi:10.1103      /PhysRevA.74.022320.

[21]  P.  Silvi,  V.  Giovannetti,  S.  Montangero,  M.  Rizzi,  J.  I.  Cirac  and  R.  Fazio,    Homoge-
       neous binary trees as ground states of quantum critical Hamiltonians,   Physical Review
       A 81(062335) (2010), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevA.81.062335.

[22]  M. Gerster, P. Silvi, M. Rizzi, R. Fazio, T. Calarco and S. Montangero, Unconstrained tree
       tensor network:  An adaptive gauge picture for enhanced performance,  Physical Review B
       90(125154) (2014), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.90.125154.

[23]  L. Tagliacozzo, G. Evenbly and G. Vidal,   Simulation of two-dimensional quantum sys-
       tems using a tree tensor network that exploits the entropic area law,  Physical Review B
       80(235127) (2009), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.80.235127.

[24]  A. J. Ferris,   Area law and real-space renormalization,   Physical Review B 87(125139)
       (2013), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.87.125139.

[25]  T. Felser,  Tree tensor networks for high-dimensional quantum systems and beyond,  Phd
       thesis, Universität des Saarlandes, doi:10.22028      /D291-35211(2022).

[26]  T. Felser, S. Notarnicola and S. Montangero,  Efficient Tensor Network Ansatz for High-
       Dimensional  Quantum  Many-Body  Problems,    Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  126(170603)  (2021),
       doi:10.1007      /s10955-014-1042-8.

[27]  X.  Qian  and  M.  Qin,    Area  law  and  real-space  renormalization,    Physical  Review  B
       105(205102) (2022), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.105.205102.

[28]  F.  Baccari,  D.  Bacilieri,  M.  Ballarin,  F.  P.  Barone,  F.  Campaioli,  G.  Cataldi,  A.  Coppi,
       A. Costantini, A. Datta, A. De Girolamo, D. Jaschke, S. B. Koži´c et al.,  Quantum TEA:
       qtealeaves, doi:10.5281      /zenodo.10498928(2024).

[29]  N. Reini´c, L. Paveši´c, S. Montangero and D. Jaschke,  aTTNs in Quantum TEA - the user
       guide,https: //baltig.infn.it/qpd/attn-cookbook/-/tree/main(2025).

[30]  R.   Orús,       A   Practical   Introduction   to   Tensor   Networks:    Matrix   Product   States
       and   Projected   Entangled   Pair   States,         Annals   of   Physics   349,   117   (2014),
       doi:10.1016      /j.aop.2014.06.013.

[31]  J. Biamonte and V. Bergholm,   Tensor networks in a nutshell,   arXiv preprint (2017),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.1708.00006.

[32]  D.  Perez-Garcia,  F.  Verstraete,  M.  M.  Wolf  and  J.  I.  Cirac,     Matrix  product  state
       representations,       Quantum   Information   and   Computation  7(5&6),   401   (2007),
       doi:10.26421      /QIC7.5-6-1.

[33]  M.  Van  Damme,  J.  Haegeman,  I.  McCulloch  and  L.  Vanderstraeten,   Efficient  higher-
       order  matrix  product  operators  for  time  evolution,    SciPost  Physics  17(135)  (2024),
       doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhys.17.5.135.

[34]  J. Haegeman, J. I. Cirac, T. J. Osborne, I. Pižorn, H. Verschelde and F. Verstraete,  Time-
       Dependent  Variational  Principle  for  Quantum  Lattices,    Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  107(070601)
       (2011), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevLett.107.070601.



                                                          38
  SciPost Physics Lecture Notes                                                              Submission



[35]  J. Haegeman, C. Lubich, I. Oseledets, B. Vandereycken and F. Verstraete,  Unifying time
       evolution and optimization with matrix product states,  Phys. Rev. B 94(165116) (2016),
       doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.94.165116.

[36]  L. Lehtovaara,  J. Toivanen and J. Eloranta,   Solution of time-independent Schrödinger
       equation by the imaginary time propagation method,  Journal of Computational Physics
       221(1) (2016), doi:10.1016      /j.jcp.2006.06.006.

[37]  S. Paeckel, T. Köhler, A. Swoboda, R. S. Manmana, U. Schollwöck and C. Hubig,  Time-
       evolution  methods  for  matrix-product  states,   Annals  of  Physics 411(167998)  (2019),
       doi:10.1016      /j.aop.2019.167998.

[38]  M. Gerster, M. Rizzi, P. Silvi, M. Dalmonte and S. Montangero, Fractional quantum Hall ef-
       fect in the interacting Hofstadter model via tensor networks, Physical Review B 96(195123)
       (2017), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevB.96.195123.

[39]  M. Hauru, M. Van Damme and J. Haegeman, Riemannian optimization of isometric tensor
       networks, SciPost Physics 10(040) (2021), doi:10.21468      /SciPostPhys.10.2.040.

[40]  G. Cataldi, A. Abedi, G. Magnifico, S. Notarnicola, N. Dalla Pozza, V. Giovannetti and
       S. Montangero,  Hilbert curve vs Hilbert space:  exploiting fractal 2D covering to increase
       tensor network efficiency, Quantum 5, 556 (2021), doi:10.22331      /q-2021-09-29-556.

[41]  H. W. J. Blöte and Y. Deng,  Cluster Monte Carlo simulation of the transverse Ising model,
       Physical Review E 66(066110) (2002), doi:10.1103      /PhysRevE.66.066110.

[42]  D.   Jaschke,   M.   Ballarin,   N.   Reini´c,   L.   Paveši´c   and   S.   Montangero,        Bench-
       marking  Quantum  Red  TEA  on  CPUs,   GPUs,   and  TPUs,      arXiv  preprint  (2024),
       doi:10.48550      /arXiv.2409.03818.

[43]  D.  Wu,  R.  Rossi,  F.  Vicentini,  N.  Astrakhantsev,  F.  Becca,  X.  Cao,  J.  Carrasquilla,
       F.  Ferrari,  A.  Georges,  M.  Hibat-Allah,  M.  Imada,  A.  M.  Läuchli  et  al.,      Varia-
       tional benchmarks for quantum many-body problems,  Science 386(6719), 296 (2024),
       doi:10.1126      /science.adg9774.

[44]  S. A. Khandoker, J. M. Abedin and M. Hibat-Allah,  Supplementing recurrent neural net-
       works with annealing to solve combinatorial optimization problems,  Machine Learning:
       Science and Technology 4(1) (2023), doi:10.1088      /2632-2153/acb895.

[45]  N. Reini´c, L. Paveši´c, S. Montangero and D. Jaschke,  Datasets for the aTTN Cookbook,
       doi:10.5281      /zenodo.15879227(2025).

[46]  N. Reini´c, L. Paveši´c, S. Montangero and D. Jaschke,   Figures for the aTTN Cookbook,
       doi:10.6084      /m9.figshare.29562320(2025).















                                                        39