NNQS-AFQMC: Neural network quantum states
       enhanced fermionic quantum Monte Carlo


  Zhi-Yu Xiao,∗,†,∥      Bowen Kan,‡,¶,∥      Huan Ma,§,∥   Bowen Zhao,§,∥   and Honghui

                                                 Shang∗,§


†Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 603, Beijing 100190, China

‡Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

             ¶University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China

 §State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, University of Science and

                             Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
                     ∥These authors contributed equally to this manuscript.


                    E-mail:  zxiaoMain@outlook.com; shanghui.ustc@gmail.com


                                                 Abstract

          We introduce an efficient approach to implement neural network quantum states

      (NNQS)  as  trial  wavefunctions  in  auxiliary-field  quantum  Monte  Carlo  (AFQMC).

      NNQS are a recently developed class of variational ans¨atze capable of flexibly repre-

      senting many-body wavefunctions, though they often incur a high computational cost

      during  optimization.   AFQMC,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  powerful  stochastic  projec-

      tor  approach  for  ground-state  calculations,  but  it  normally  requires  an  approximate

      constraint via a trial wavefunction or trial density matrix,  whose quality affects the

      accuracy. Recently it has been shown (Xiao et al, arXiv2505.18519) that a broad class

      of highly correlated wave-functions can be integrated into AFQMC through stochastic

      sampling techniques.  In this work, we apply this approach and present a direct integra-

                                                      1
       tion of NNQS with AFQMC,allowing NNQS to serve as high-quality trial wavefunc-

       tions for AFQMC with manageable computational cost.  We test the NNQS-AFQMC

       method on the challenging nitrogen molecule (N2) at stretched geometries.  Our results

       demonstrate  that  AFQMC  with  an  NNQS  trial  wavefunction  can  attain  near-exact

       total  energies,  highlighting  the  potential  of  AFQMC  with  NNQS  to  overcome  long-

       standing  challenges  in  strongly  correlated  electronic  structure  calculations.   We  also

       outline future research directions for improving this promising methodology.


1    Introduction


The exploration of interacting quantum many-body systems stands as a pivotal challenge

that transcends multiple scientific frontiers, encompassing condensed matter physics, nuclear

physics, cold atoms physics, quantum chemistry, and materials science.  The complexity is

deeply  rooted  in  its  intricate  and  non-trivial  interplay  among  various  degrees  of  freedom,

which gives rise to various phenomena that are difficult to understand and predict.  Over

the last decades, remarkable progress has been made in theoretical frameworks and compu-
tational algorithms.  However, each of these methods has its own limitations and is typically

optimized for particular types of systems or physical regimes. No universal approach exists at

present that can fully address the complexity of interacting quantum systems while providing

systematically accurate results across a wide range of many-body models and materials.  The

continuous development of more general, computationally efficient, and highly accurate nu-

merical techniques is essential.  Such advancements would enable a deeper understanding of

fundamental quantum phenomena and facilitate the design and discovery of novel quantum

materials with potential applications in areas such as high-temperature superconductivity,

quantum computing, and quantum information science.

    In recent years, significant advancements in numerical algorithms within quantum chem-

istry have vividly demonstrated a pronounced trend towards interdisciplinary collaboration,
particularly with the integration of artificial intelligence, a paradigm often referred to as “AI

                                                        2
for science”.  The application of neural networks in quantum chemistry has emerged as a

rapidly evolving frontier, especially since Carleo and Troyer introduced the neural network

quantum state (NNQS) method in 2017,1 which leverages neural networks to represent quan-

tum wavefunctions and has shown significant promise in accurately describing complex quan-

tum many-body systems.  Their approach represents wavefunctions using restricted Boltz-

mann machines (RBMs) optimized through variational Monte Carlo (VMC), demonstrating

remarkable effectiveness in capturing quantum system complexity.  The NNQS methodology

has since undergone rapid development and extension.2–8  Initial applications to molecular

systems  showed  promising  results,  with  RBMs  achieving  higher  accuracy  than  CCSD(T)

in various cases.9  Since then, a variety of neural-network-based wavefunction ans¨atze have

been developed for both model systems and real molecules, including autoregressive networks
and others, achieving impressive accuracy in many cases.10–16  Though continuous achieve-

ments have been made, the NNQS approach still suffers from the complexity of many-body

problems.  In particular, for large-scale strongly correlated systems, the computational cost

remains prohibitively high.  The training of neural networks requires extensive sampling and

optimization; as the system size increases, the wavefunction complexity grows significantly,

causing difficulties such as slower convergence, increased risk of overfitting, and prolonged

training times.  It is urgent to explore new algorithmic frameworks that go beyond the tra-

ditional variational ansatz and investigate hybrid approaches that combine neural networks

with other quantum chemistry methods.

    Meanwhile, in quantum chemistry, auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo (AFQMC) has

emerged as a powerful fermionic quantum Monte Carlo method in the study of many-electron
systems.  AFQMC is a projector-based algorithm, employs Monte Carlo sampling to simu-

late imaginary-time projection, and the infamous sign problem is mitigated by introducing

trial  wavefunctions  to  constrain  its  sampling  process.   AFQMC  with  constraint  has  en-

abled a wide range of applications where sign-problem-free computations are not feasible.

These include strongly correlated models in condensed matter physics, 17,18 bulk solids,19,20


                                                       3
and  quantum  chemistry.21,22  In  practice,  the  accuracy  of  AFQMC  depends  on  the  qual-

ity of the trial wavefunction in characterizing the ground state.  In standard AFQMC im-

plementations,  Slater  determinant  wavefunctions  and  their  variants  are  typically  used  as

trial wavefunctions.  These variants encompass orthogonal or non-orthogonal linear combi-

nations of Slater determinants,21,23,24 symmetry-projected mean-field wavefunctions,25 pro-

jected Bardeen–Cooper–Schrieffer (BCS) states,26,27 and pseudo-BCS states.28 In benchmark

studies of correlated fermion systems, this framework has shown good systematicity. 19,22,29,30

For  strongly  correlated  systems,  more  sophisticated  trial  wavefunctions  are  required,  and

their implementation to AFQMC relies on configuration interaction (CI) approaches. 23,31–34

In extended systems, increasing the complexity of the trial wavefunction using a configuration

interaction approach fails to achieve size-consistency, which restricts the broad application of
AFQMC. The search for appropriate trial wavefunctions and their efficient implementation

has long been a key challenge for AFQMC algorithms.

    In this work, we combine the strengths of NNQS and AFQMC by implementing NNQS

trial wave functions in AFQMC. Recent breakthroughs in quantum Monte Carlo methodol-

ogy35 have established a novel framework for incorporating many-body trial wavefunctions

with AFQMC. Building upon this foundational work, we demonstrate an approach to inte-

grating sophisticated NNQS trial wavefunctions with AFQMC. Our method leverages the

natural CI representation in most NNQS parameterizations, thus enabling a direct and effi-

cient coupling between these two powerful computational paradigms.  We demonstrate that

this  NNQS-enhanced  AFQMC  method  yields  highly  accurate  results  for  the  prototypical

strongly correlated N2  molecule,  achieving nearly exactness.  The remainder of this paper
is  organized  as  follows.   In  Sec  .2,  we  provide  a  concise  overview  of  NNQS  and  AFQMC

methodologies.  In Sec .3 we elaborate on the detailed integration of NNQS with AFQMC.

In Sec .4, we present numerical results for N2, highlighting the accuracy and efficiency of the

combined approach.  In Sec .5, we conclude our work and discuss possible developments.




                                                       4
2     Preliminaries


For general quantum chemistry problems, theab initioHamiltonian can be written as below


                                    NX X                        NX  X
                            ˆH=             hija†iσajσ + 12              Vijkla†iσa†jρakρalσ                             (1)

                                    ij   σ                     ijkl  σρ

whereNdenotes the number of basis involved,ijklandσρspecify the index of basis and

spin, respectively.h ij andV   ijkl can be explicitly determined based on the chosen basis.

    In the following, we introduce NNQS and AFQMC that are applied to evaluate the ground

state of such anab initioHamiltonian in Sec. 2.1 and Sec. 2.2 respectively.  Though these
two methods rely on different principles, we will show in Sec. 3 that they can be integrated

to provide highly accurate results in a scaled way.


2.1    Neural Network Quantum State

In quantum chemistry, the many-electron wavefunction can be expressed in second-quantized

form as a linear combination of Slater determinant basis states (configurations):



                                                 |Ψ⟩=  X      Ψ(x)|x⟩                                                    (2)
                                                           x
where|x⟩=|x                        1,x2,...,xN⟩represents  a  specific  occupation  configuration  ofNelectrons

(withx     i ∈{0,1}indicating  whether  spin-orbitaliis  occupied).   The  coefficient  Ψ(x)  is

generally complex and can be written as:


                                                Ψ(x) =|Ψ(x)|e           iϕ(x)                                                         (3)


where|Ψ(x)|andϕ(x) are the amplitude and phase of the configurationx.  In our approach,

we employQiankunNet, a heterogeneous neural network, to represent the quantum state

coefficients.11,12 For the amplitude, we use a Transformer decoder architecture that processes



                                                            5
an input configurationxthrough multiple self-attention layers.  Formally, we embed the elec-

tron configuration (occupations and orbital positions) into an initial hidden representationh             0

using learnable embedding matricesW        e andW   p.  This representation is then passed through

nstacked Transformer decoder layers:


                                            h0 =XW  e +W  p

                                            hj = Decoder(h    j−1   ),  j∈[1,n]                                         (4)

                                    |Ψ ⃗θ(x)|       2 = softmax(h        nWhead)


whereW             head is a final linear projection, the softmax ensures the outputs form a normalized

probability distribution and the network’s parameters ⃗θ= (h  n,Whead) are to be optimized.

This yields|Ψ      ⃗θ(x)|(the amplitude) for each configurationx.  The phaseϕ               ⃗θ(x) is generated

by a separate multilayer perceptron (MLP) that takes either the same embedded input or

the  output  of  one  of  the  decoder  layers  and  producesϕ     ⃗θ(x).   By  splitting  amplitude  and

phase into two networks, we allow greater flexibility in capturing the sign structure of the

wavefunction.
    Training an NNQS to represent a ground-state wavefunction typically involves variational

Monte Carlo (VMC), where the network’s parameters⃗θare optimized to minimize the energy

expectation  value:  In  this  formulation,  the  system’s  energy  expectation  value  becomes  a

parametric functionE(       ⃗θ) dependent on the variational parameters ⃗θ:


                                                              X    Eloc(x) Ψ⃗θ(x) 2

                                   E( ⃗θ) = ⟨Ψ|H|Ψ⟩             x   XΨ⃗θ(x) 2                                          (5)
                                               ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩            =

                                                                     x

where

                                       Eloc(x) =  X
                                                      x′ Hxx′ Ψ⃗θ(x ′)/Ψ  ⃗θ(x).                                         (6)
andH        xx′  =⟨x|H|x    ′⟩is  the  Hamiltonian  matrix  element.   Direct  computation  of  Eq.5  is

                                                             6
typically intractable because the number of possible configurations grows exponentially with

system  size.   To  overcome  this  limitation,  we  evaluate  the  energy  as  an  expectation  over

the probability distributionp           ⃗θ(x) =  Ψ⃗θ(x) 2, which is done by Monte Carlo sampling over

configurationsx.  The estimation of energy average local energy measurements over these

sampled configurations{x              i}Nsi=1 :


                                                            NsX
                                            eE ⃗θ =   1Ns      Eloc xi.                                               (7)

                                                            i=1

    The  gradient-driven  optimization  approaches  often  yield  significantly  better  computa-

tional performance than their derivative-free counterparts.  The gradients of Eq. 5 can be
efficiently computed via automatic differentiation by leveraging the sampled configurations:

                                            h Eloc(x)−E     p[E loc(x) ] ∇⃗θ ln Ψ∗⃗θ(x) i
                      ∇⃗θ  ˜E= 2 Re      Ep                                                                         (8)


where the gradient estimator∇         ⃗θ  ˜E, serving as an approximation to the exact energy gradient

∇⃗θE, cooperates with optimizer to refine the parameter  ⃗θ, thereby constituting a complete

iteration in the VMC algorithm.


2.2    Auxiliary-Field Quantum Monte Carlo (AFQMC)

The application of AFQMC to real materials start from the “Monte Carlo form”: 23


                                             NX  X                       ΓX
                                      ˆH=             hija†iσajσ + 1         ˆL2γ,                                        (9)
                                              ij   σ                 2   γ


where  ˆLγ  denote  sets  of  one-body  operators,  whose  matrix  elements  depend  on  details  of

the  “factorization”  transformation  (a  modified  Cholesky, 36  density-fitting,37  etc)  but  are

explicitly specified from{V     ijkl}that reproduces Eq. 1, and Γ∼O(10)N.

    The ground-state calculation is performed through the imaginary-time projectione    −β    ˆH

with sufficiently long imaginary timeβon an initial state|Ψ          I⟩that has a non-zero overlap

                                                           7
with the ground state.  This is achieved by employing the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition, 38,39

which divides the imaginary-time projector into small time slices:


                                       |Ψ GS⟩∝limβ→∞ e−β    ˆH = (e −τ    ˆH)n|Ψ I⟩,                                     (10)


wheren=β/τdenotes  the  number  of  time  slices.   The  length  of  a  time  sliceτmust  be

sufficiently  small  to  minimize  the  errors  from  commutators  (compared  to  MC  statistical

errors).  The Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation 40,41 is applied to decouple the short-time
projection in each slice:                                Z

                                              e−τ    ˆH≈     dyp(y)           ˆB(y),                                             (11)

wherep(y) is a probability density function, which can be either discrete or continuous.  For

example, a Gaussian distribution is commonly used:


                                         p(y) =  Y       √1

                                                     γ     2π e−y    2γ/2 ∝e −y·y/2   ,                                       (12)


and the one-body propagator  ˆB(y) is given by         36



                                                              P        −τ    ˆLγe−τ    ˆT/2 .                                       (13)
                                         ˆB(y) =e    −τ    ˆT/2 eγyγ√


whereydenotes a series of{y         γ}withy     γ∈Randy·y=      Pγy2γ.  Since the projection of these

one-body operators  ˆB(y) to a single determinant|ϕ⟩is another single determinant:|ϕ      ′⟩∝
ˆB(y)|ϕ⟩and, without loss of generality,|Ψ        I⟩can be chosen as a sum of single determinants,

the  sampling  of  auxiliary  fieldsyis  mapped  into  random  walks  in  the  manifold  of  Slater

determinants along the direction of imaginary time evolution. 42

    Fermions  are  described  by  anti-symmetric  wavefunctions,  which  leads  to  the  infamous

phase  problem  in  Monte  Carlo  sampling  methods.   In  AFQMC,  the  phase  problem  arises

during imaginary time evolution when walkers randomly become perpendicular to the ground



                                                               8
state, which contributes only statistical noise to the ground-state estimation.  The number of

such perpendicular determinants typically grows exponentially with projection time, causing

the Monte Carlo signal to be overwhelmed by statistical fluctuations.To be more clear, once

walkers become perpendicular to the ground state:⟨Ψ      GS|ϕ⟩= 0,  the following imaginary

time  projection  on  walker|ϕ⟩contributes  nothing  to  the  whole  estimation  of  the  ground

state  as⟨Ψ   GS|e− ˆHβ|ϕ⟩=  0,  leading  to  the  exponential  growth  of  statistical  fluctuations.

Therefore,eliminating these determinants that are perpendicular to the ground state is an

exact condition which removes the sign or phase problem.43,44

    To resolve the phase problem, ground state AFQMC utilizes a trial wavefunction⟨Ψ        T|

to constrain the random walk paths.  This is accomplished by introducing a dynamic shift                                   y

in the integration over auxiliary fields in Equation (11):

                                                   Z
                                        e−τ    ˆH =   dyp(y−       y)    ˆB(y−  y).                                       (14)


With this equation, each propagation step can be executed:


                                e−τ    ˆH X Wik |ϕ ik⟩                Wi+1         k ⟩
                                                 ⟨Ψ T|ϕ ik⟩→X            k  |ϕ i+1⟨Ψ T|ϕ i+1
                                         k                         k                  k ⟩.                             (15)

This advancement moves the walker according to:


                                              ˆB(y−    yik)|ϕ ik⟩→|ϕ i+1k ⟩,                                                (16)


and assigns a new weight:

                                              I(y,  yik,ϕik)W ik→W  i+1k                                                   (17)

where the importance functionI(y,                yik,ϕik) is defined as:


                                I(y,  yik,ϕik) = p(y−       yik) ⟨Ψ T| ˆB(y−     yik)|ϕ ik⟩
                                                       p(y)              ⟨Ψ T|ϕ ik⟩    .                               (18)



                                                             9
The shift    yik is selected to minimize the fluctuations in the weights.  For smallτ, the optimal

choice for each component is given by:45


                                             yik,γ  =− √τ⟨Ψ T|ˆLγ|ϕ ik⟩⟨Ψ T|ϕ ik⟩  .                                              (19)


When walkers are propagated through the above procedure to then       th step and reach equi-

librium (i.e., whenβ=n                  eqτis sufficiently large to reach the ground state in Eq. 10 within

the desired statistical accuracy), the ground - state energy can be measured using the mixed
estimator21,44 for alln>n     eq:

                                                             P         ⟨Ψ T| ˆH|ϕ  nk⟩
                                         ⟨Ψ T| ˆH|Ψ  n⟩         kWnkP   ⟨Ψ T|ϕnk⟩
                                          ⟨Ψ T|Ψ n⟩    =              kWnk   .                                        (20)


The importance sampling formalism, combined with the force bias, automatically enforces

the  constrained  path  approximation42,43  in  the  presence  of  a  sign  problem.   Forab  initio

Hamiltonians, an additional phaseless approximation23,42,44 is applied.  This approximation

projects the weight of each Slater determinant onto the real axis in the complex plane: 23


                             Iph(y,   yik,ϕik) =I(y,     yik,ϕik),∗max(0,cos(∆θ))                             (21)


where
                                                ∆θ= Arg ⟨Ψ T|ϕ i+1k ⟩
                                                               ⟨Ψ T|ϕ ik⟩ .                                                (22)

The  specific  implementation  details  can  vary.   For  example,  there  are  local  energy  versus
hybrid methods,46 methods that remove the absolute value in Equation (21) by maintaining

the overall phase during long projection times,44,47 or techniques such as cosine projection,

the half-plane method, or others used to eliminate the finite density at the origin in the com-

plex plane.23 When all auxiliary fields are real (such as in the case of Hubbard interactions),

the phaseless formalism simplifies to the constrained path approach, 43  with ∆θ= 0.  The



                                                            10
zero values in the importance function prevent the random walk from encountering the sign

problem

    The  implementation  of  constraints  introduces  a  systematic  bias  that  depends  on  how

well the trial wavefunction⟨Ψ         T|can characterize the ground state.  Extensive benchmark

studies have demonstrated the high accuracy of AFQMC, both in models 18,29 and real mate-

rials.19,22,30 As we discussed above, once the overlap between the trial wavefunction and the

general Slater determinant can be evaluated, the implementation of the trial wavefunction

to AFQMC is straightforward, and the remaining difficulty is how efficiently this evaluation

can  be.   A  wide  variety  of  trial  wavefunctions  have  been  developed  for  AFQMC,  includ-

ing single determinants,43,44 multi-Slater determinants,22 Bardeen–Cooper–Schrieffer (BCS)

states,48,49 tensor-network states50 and CI excited states.23,24,32,33 However, these wavefunc-
tions often suffer from limited expressiveness or the absence of robust optimization tools.


3    Integration of NNQS with AFQMC

Recent advancement35 has shown that a broad class of many-body trial wavefunctions can

be effectively implemented in AFQMC via stochastic sampling.  Leveraging such progress, we

introduce a novel integration of NNQS as trial wavefunctions with AFQMC. In this section,

we  provide  a  concise  summary  of  the  work  in  Ref35  to  introduce  the  stochastic  sampling

approach and elaborate on details in its application to NNQS trial wavefunctions.

    The main conclusion in Ref35 is that an efficient implementation of the many-body trial

wavefunction⟨Ψ         T|to AFQMC by stochastic sampling can be devised if there is an integral

representation of such a trial wavefunction:

                                                    Z
                                           ⟨Ψ T|=       dx⟨Ψ   T|x⟩⟨x|.                                              (23)


where the variablexparameterizes a family of states|x⟩and its overlap⟨x|ϕ⟩with Slater

determinant|ϕ⟩can  be  evaluated  effectively.   This  can  be  understood  by  noticing  that

                                                        11
trial wavefunction⟨Ψ         T|only appears in the evaluation of overlap ratios and “local” quan-

tities—such  as  force  biases  and  local  energies—during  the  AFQMC  procedure  detailed  in

Sec. 2.2.  Once a specific integration representation is defined, stochastic sampling enables

accurate estimation of these quantities.  In Ref,35  authors demonstrated this approach by

integrating Variational AFQMC (VAFQMC) trial wavefunctions with AFQMC, based on an

integration representation formulated in the auxiliary field space.  This idea can be general-

ized to NNQS trial wavefunctions, based on an integration representation formulated in the

configuration space.

    For NNQS, there is a natural integral representation in the configuration space as dis-

cussed  in  Sec.  2.1.   The  Eq.  23  reduces  to  the  integration  representation  of  NNQS  trial

wavefunction :                                         Z
                                             ⟨Ψ T|=        dxΨ(x)⟨x|.                                                (24)

with  the  variablexdenotes  the  configuration  within  the  configuration  space,  and  the  co-

efficient  Ψ(x)  =⟨Ψ      T|x⟩is  determined  in  the  NNQS  trial  wavefunction.   The  evaluation

of overlap⟨x|ϕ⟩between the configurationxand the Slater determinant|ϕ⟩is straightfor-

ward.23 The coefficient Ψ(x) is systematically optimized in NNQS to approximate the ground

state.  As detailed in Sec. 2.1, once the NNQS parameters are optimized, these coefficients

can be efficiently obtained, enabling their integration with AFQMC.

    To allow a stochastic sampling of the trial wavefunction (i.e., Eq. 24) in AFQMC, the
main  modification  to  the  standard  AFQMC  process  is  to  reformulate  the  propagation  of

walkers in Eq. 15.  Conceptually, this involves augmenting the standard AFQMC ensemble of

random walkers{|ϕ    ik⟩,W ik}with an additional set ofPconfigurations{x                 ik,p}(p= 1,2,···,P)

associated with each walker.  Here,{x      ik,p}are sampled from the integration space defined in

Eq. 24,  allowing the trial wavefunction to be stochastically approximated.  For notational

clarity, we suppress the indiceskandiin the following discussion, denoting the current walker

state as|ϕ⟩with weightWand associated sampled configurationsx                    p, and the propagated

state as|ϕ  ′⟩with weightW ′ andx  ′p (analogous to the blue and red objects in Fig. 1).  The

                                                          12
many-body trial wavefunction can then be estimated via:



                                                                  PX     Ψ(x  p)⟨x  p|
                                   ⟨Ψ T| .=⟨   ¯ΨT|= N(ϕ)  P          Ψ(x  p)⟨x  p|ϕ⟩ ,                                 (25)
                                                                 p=1

where the normalization factorN(ϕ)≡      RΨ(x  p)⟨x  p|ϕ⟩ dxemerges naturally from the sam-

pling procedure but does not need to be computed explicitly.  The samplesx       p  are drawn
from the probability distributionP(x             p;ϕ) = Ψ(x  p)⟨x  p|ϕ⟩ /N(ϕ) ensuring that the ensemble

average in Eq. 25 converges to the desired trial wavefunction, which is achieved by MCMC

in this work.

    Based on Eq. 25, the overlap ratio can be estimated using the following formula:

                                                          PP       ⟨x p|ϕ  ′⟩
                                           ⟨ ¯ΨT|ϕ′⟩         p=1PP⟨x p|ϕ⟩ S(x  p)
                                           ⟨ ¯ΨT|ϕ⟩     =        p=1 S(x  p)  ,                                          (26)

where
                                                S(x  p)≡    Ψ(x)⟨x     p|ϕ⟩Ψ(x)⟨x     p|ϕ⟩                           (27)


serves  as  a  phase  factor  for  each  of  the  P  configurations  associated  with  the  walker|ϕ⟩.

Similarly, the local expectation of any observable  ˆOfor the state|ϕ⟩can be estimated as:

                                                           PP      ⟨x p| ˆO|ϕ⟩
                                         ⟨ ¯ΨT| ˆO|ϕ⟩   .=    p=1PP⟨x p|ϕ⟩  S(x  p)
                                          ⟨ ¯ΨT|ϕ⟩                 p=1 S(x  p)  .                                       (28)

The  computed  values  from  the  above  equations  enable  the  calculation  of  the  force  bias

described in Eq. 19, which is essential for completing the propagation of walkers as Eq. 16.

The weight update fromWtoW      ′  is achieved through the functionI                  ph  defined in Eq. 21.

With these fundamental components in place,  the integration of NNQS into the AFQMC

framework becomes feasible.

    The whole algorithm is performed in a leapfrog manner, that summarized in Fig. 1.  As

presented, the standard AFQMC propagation is first performed to advance walker{|ϕ⟩,W}→


                                                             13
Figure 1: Illustration of the integration of NNQS with AFQMC. One random AFQMC walker
and its tethered MCMC sampled configurations are shown, during one leapfrog update step.
Circle and rectangular denote one-body operators  ˆB(y) and configurations⟨x                  p|, respectively.
Blue/red indicates current/updated state in the MC. 0).  current state of the walker|ϕ  ik⟩
and MCMC sampled configurations⟨                       ¯ΨT|attached to it.  1).  the walker is propagated one
step,|ϕ     ik⟩→|ϕ i+1k ⟩and its weight updatedW      ik→W  i+1k    , using the current samples of⟨   ¯ΨT|
as importance function and constraint.  2).  MCMC sweeps are performed to update each
configurations (eachp, represented by one row of rectangular),x              ik,p→x  i+1k,p , according to the
walker’s new position,|ϕ       i+1k ⟩.









                                                        14
{|ϕ ′⟩,W ′}according  to⟨      ¯ΨT| with  configurations{x   p}that  sampled  from  the  probability

distributionP(x         ′p;ϕ′).  Then,  as walker is advanced to|ϕ  ′⟩,  MCMC is adopted to update

⟨ ¯ΨT|→⟨ ¯Ψ′T|with newly sampled configurations{x       ′p}according to the updated probability

distributionP(x         ′p;ϕ′).  One noticed “hand-off” occurs between two stochastic samples of the

trial wavefunction.  That is, considering the statistical fluctuation of Monte Carlo sampling,

the update of configurations{x         ′p}can leads to an extra ratio of overlaps being inserted before

the beginning of the next AFQMC step:  (|ϕ ′⟩→|ϕ′′⟩):


                                          R(   ¯ΨT→  ¯Ψ′T ;ϕ′) =⟨ ¯Ψ′T|ϕ′⟩⟨ ¯ΨT|ϕ′⟩,                                          (29)


which  is  identity  when  the  NNQS  trial  wavefunction  is  evaluated  exactly  by⟨  ¯ΨT|.   This

statistical fluctuation can lead to a violation of the constraint condition, and we modify the

weight of the walker|ϕ  ′⟩by the cosine projection to correct for it:


                                         W′→W  ′·max(0,cos(∆θ            T )),                                         (30)


where  ∆θ  T  =  Arg[R(          ¯ΨT →  ¯Ψ′T ;ϕ′)].   For  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  detailed

algorithm in implementing NNQS, readers are referred to the APPENDIX. A.

    It is important to emphasize that the phase factorS(x    p) appearing in Eqs. 26 and 28

is not associated with the presence of the “phase problem”.In other words,  the value of
1 PP
P     p=1 S(x  p) won’t reduce to zero during the propagation of AFQMC, if it is finite in the
initialization of AFQMC.Conceptually, this distinction arises because, in the limit of infinite
samples (P→∞), the denominator             1         PP
                                                  P     p=1 S(x  p) in Eq. 26 converges to a finite positive
value or such configurations are naturally removed by the constraint process, ensuring the

stability of the algorithm.  However, in practical implementations with finiteP, statistical

fluctuations in the sampled phase factors can introduce bias.  Specifically, the approximation

in  Eq.  30  relies  on  the  assumption  thatR(          ¯ΨT →  ¯Ψ′T ;ϕ′)  is  close  to  identity.   WhenP
is  insufficient,  this  assumption  breaks  down,  leading  to  systematic  errors  in  the  updates.


                                                           15
These  errors  manifest  as  increased  variance  in  the  estimation  and,  in  extreme  cases,  can

induce numerical instability. In this work, all calculations are performed under a significant
1 PP
P    p=1 S(x  p)≈1.
    In the practical implementation, instead of directly invoking NNQS within the AFQMC

framework  (i.e.,  coefficients⟨Ψ   T|x p⟩are  computed  on-the-fly  during  AFQMC  iterations),

we obtain coefficients from a pre-computed dataset.  Specifically, all configurationsx             p  and

their corresponding coefficients⟨Ψ   T|x p⟩are precomputed and stored on disk.  In this work,

we saved all configurations in NNQS Monte Carlo estimation (Eq. 7) as our precomputed

dataset, and the number of stored configurations is aroundO(10                   5∼10    6).  Such a choice of

configurations is sufficient to characterize the essential features of the NNQS wavefunction.

By doing so, the sampling of the NNQS trial wavefunction reduces to a sampling from the
precomputed dataset.  And the detailed MCMC process to sample from such datasets can be

further optimized.  Beyond the standard configuration space proposal strategy—where new

configurations are generated via electron hopping/exchange from old configurations—we in-

troduce a “sorted labeling” strategy.  Configurations are first sorted by the absolute value of

their coefficients and assigned sequential labels.  New states are then proposed by randomly

selecting labels in the vicinity of the old label whose coefficients are comparable to each other.

This construction yields a substantial improvement in MCMC acceptance ratio compared

to standard configuration space proposals, particularly when the magnitude of coefficients

is associated with the importance of configurations in the consist of NNQS wavefunction,

which is a characteristic feature of NNQS wavefunctions.  In this work,  the “sorted label-

ing” strategy is implemented in our MCMC proposing process to effectively integrate with
NNQS trial wavefunctions.More details about the “sorted labeling” strategy is elaborated

in APPENDIX. E

    Our  integration  of  NNQS  with  AFQMC  scales  linearly  to  the  number  of  Metropolis

samples (P),  introducing a multiplicative prefactor to the cost of standard AFQMC with

single-determinant  trial  wavefunctions.   This  prefactor  is  significantly  smaller  thanPby


                                                        16
adopting  an  efficient  Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury  (SMW)  algorithm 23,37  that  accelerates

the computation of the ratio ⟨x   ′|ϕ⟩⟨x|ϕ⟩       between “adjacent” configurationsxandx        ′,reducing the

cost of MCMC procedures in updating configurations.  Conceptually, the computational cost

of our approach withPsamples is comparable to previous AFQMC algorithms withPcon-

figurations in Complete Active Space (CAS) trial wavefunctions, 22,23 which usually handles

P∼O(10           3) configurations.  One may notice that there is a naive implementation of NNQS

with AFQMC by directly selecting configurations with the largest coefficients in NNQS as

the trial wavefunction, which is similar to the implementation with CAS trial wavefunctions.

However,  this  naive  integration  proves  ineffective.   The  number  of  configurations  needed

to describe NNQS grows exponentially, andO(10            3) configurations fall significantly short of

fulfilling this requirement.  To show this, a comparison between our implementation in this
work and the naive implementation is presented in APPENDIX.B.

    The computational bottleneck of our calculations resides in the training of NNQS, which

is challenged by extensive sampling and prolonged optimization steps as the system size in-

creases, especially for strongly correlated systems.  To tackle this issue, instead of performing

a single AFQMC calculation with a fully converged NNQS trial wavefunction, we conduct

multiple AFQMC runs using a series of NNQS trial wavefunctions optimized with increased

training  steps.   This  allows  us  to  monitor  AFQMC  energy  convergence  during  the  NNQS

training process.  Such integration leverages the observation that AFQMC energies converge

well before the convergence of NNQS training,  enabling high-accuracy results with signif-

icantly  reduced  computational  overhead.   As  illustrated  in  Fig.  3,  this  approach  achieves

near-exact results while reducing NNQS training steps overhead.  These results highlight a
major improvement in the efficiency of our integration.










                                                        17
4    Results


In this section, the performance and advantages of our method are examined through its ap-

plication to N2.  Given the challenge of accurately describing the triple-bond dissociation, N2

bond breaking serves as a typical system to benchmark numerical algorithms.  We systemati-

cally investigated N2 at a series of increased bond lengths from 2.118 Bohr (equilibrium) to a

stretched length of 4.2 Bohr, ranging from weakly and strongly correlated electronic regimes.

DMRG reference51 and previous AFQMC results52 are benchmarked with this work.  In the

following, we introduce the detailed workflow of our calculations with practical parameters,

summaries of our main results, and then focus on two detailed but crucial observations in
our integration of NNQS with AFQMC. Though our integration is general for any NNQS,

in this work, all NNQS trial wave functions are generated from QiankunNet. 11,12

    Our calculations commences with Restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) executed through PySCF. 53,54

The outputs, including molecular orbitals and electron integrals, serve as inputs for Qiankun-

Net and AFQMC, ensuring both methods are based on the same second-quantized Hamil-

toniandefined on canonical Hartree-Fock orbitals(Eq. 1).  As proposed in Sec. 3, a series

of AFQMC calculations are carried out with NNQS trial wavefunctions along the training

process until AFQMC energies are converged within statistical error.NNQS wavefunctions

are  optimized  with  an  AdamW  optimizer.A  consistent  set  of  parameters  is  used  for  all

AFQMC calculations:  time sliceτ= 0.01, 2000 steps for thermalization, and 200 measure-

ments taken at intervals of 25 steps with 128 walkers after the equilibrium.  An increased
number of configurationsPin AFQMC is chosen to sample the NNQS trial wavefunction,

ensuring the convergence of our calculations.  All calculations are executed on AMD EPYC

7763 Processors with 128 cores.  QiankunNet is executed on a hybrid CPU-GPU architec-

ture, utilizing an Intel Xeon Platinum 8480+ processor alongside NVIDIA A800 GPUs.  The

system operates on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, with Python 3.11 and CUDA 12.2 for compatibility.

PySCF is also deployed on the same hardware, maintaining consistent Python dependencies.

    The main results of this study are summarized in Fig.  2, highlighting the improvements

                                                      18
Figure 2:  Deviations in the computed ground-state energy from NNQS and NNQS-AFQMC,
for the N2 molecule at different bond lengths, in the cc-pVDZ basis.  Energies are compared
with  near-exact  DMRG  results.51,52  Here,  NNQS  results  do  not  stand  for  the  optimized
QiankunNet results,  but the trial energy of the NNQS trial wave function for the related
NNQS-AFQMC  results.   MD-AFQMC  results,  with  trial  wave  functions  from  truncated
MCSCF,  was  taken  from  Ref.52  The  dashed  green  line  represents  the  chemical  accuracy
(1 kcal/mol).












                                                       19
of our integration.  In the figure, NNQS-AFQMC is compared against AFQMC with multi-

determinant trial wave functions (MD-AFQMC) in Ref.52 with trial wavefunctions consisting

ofO(10        3) configurations from MCSCF under a weight cutoff of 0.01.The NNQS energies

presented in Fig.  2 and the NNQS wavefunctions utilized in the NNQS-AFQMC calcula-

tions were obtained from a consistent training procedure of 12×10         4  iterations for all six

points  along  the  dissociation  curve  in  Fig.   3.The  NNQS  wavefunctions  utilized  in  the

NNQS-AFQMC calculations do not represent the optimized NNQS results.  Accurate NNQS

results55  for  N2  are  reported  during  our  preparation  of  this  work.   However,  for  larger  or

more strongly correlated systems, obtaining highly accurate NNQS wavefunctions remains

challenging with current techniques, which are considered one of the main bottlenecks in the

development of NNQS. To understand the behavior of the NNQS-AFQMC algorithm with
different quality of trial wave functions and pave the way for the following applications to

harder systems where well-optimized NNQS trial wave functions are not available, studies

with a series of non-optimized NNQS wave functions are necessary.

    For N2 at the bond length of 2.118 Bohr (i.e., weakly correlated regime), both methods

show excellent agreement with reference data, consistent with the weakly correlated nature

of this system, where even a single Hartree-Fock solution is sufficient as the trial wavefunc-

tion.  Difficulties arise as the bond is stretched and the system enters the strongly correlated

regime.  The Ref.52 fails to maintain chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol) for bond lengths exceed-

ing 2.4 Bohr.  NNQS-AFQMC for all bond lengths reaches near-exactness,  demonstrating

exceptional robustness across both equilibrium and strongly correlated regimes.  The failure

of MD-AFQMC in the strongly correlated regime corresponds to the exponentially increased
number of configurations in MCSCF to characterize the ground state, while MD-AFQMC

can only hold trial wave functions with configurations aroundO(10                   3).  The improvements

of  NNQS-AFQMC  benefit  from  our  stochastic  sampling  of  the  trial  wave  function,  which

captures the exponential increase of configurations.  Similar study of N2 bond breaking are

also presented in Ref.,35  where highly accurate results are achieved while using VAFQMC


                                                       20
trial wave function and sampled in auxiliary field space.

    Our data further establishes that NNQS-AFQMC exhibits remarkable robustness to the

variational accuracy of the underlying NNQS. Crucially,  our study prioritizes convergence

of the AFQMC energy rather than exhaustive optimization of the NNQS variational energy:

even partially optimized NNQS with residual variational errors can serve as effective trial

states  for  AFQMC.In  practice,  the  optimization  of  the  NNQS  trial  wave  function  and

related AFQMC are performed in a parallel manner.  We monitor the behavior of AFQMC

with different NNQS trial wave functions that are optimized with increased steps, and we

stop the training of NNQS, once there are converged AFQMC results.

    As  presented  in  Fig.   3  for  N2  at  4.2  Bohr,  during  the  NNQS  training  process,  five

distinct trial wavefunctions are taken at training steps 4,6,8,10,12×10                           4—capturing pro-
gressive stages of variational energy convergence.  For each wavefunction, NNQS-AFQMC is

performed to examine the dependence of AFQMC results on its wavefunction.  At 4×10       4

and 6×10      4 training steps, NNQS energies show 15-20 mHa errors.  Though NNQS-AFQMC

improves upon these results (yielding≤3 mHa errors), it fails to reach chemical accuracy.

For 8×10      4 steps, where NNQS errors drop to 10-15 mHa, NNQS-AFQMC shows consistent

convergence with near-exact results.  Beyond 10×10         4 steps, AFQMC results converge while

further NNQS optimization yields negligible improvements in AFQMC performance, through

NNQS trial wavefunctions still show potential to reach lower energy (i.e.,  not converged).

Critically, despite ongoing optimization of the neural network quantum state (NNQS) wave-

function, further improvements in accuracy are characterized by sharply diminishing returns.

Generally,  the  computational  time  per  NNQS  iteration  remains  approximately  constant;
hence,  the  total  training  time  scales  linearly  with  the  number  of  steps.   Achieving  higher

precision  in  the  late  stages  of  optimization  demands  a  substantially  increasing  number  of

iterative steps.This consistent convergence behavior is likewise observed for the remaining

points shown in Fig.  2.  This behavior underscores a key efficiency gain:  AFQMC effectively

corrects  systematic  errors  in  the  trial  wavefunction,  rendering  exhaustive  NNQS  training


                                                        21
unnecessary  once  a  minimal  quality  threshold  is  met,  yielding  substantial  computational

advantages in the training of NNQS.


























Figure 3:  The convergence of NNQS-AFQMC along the training process of NNQS for N2 at
4.2 Bohr (cc-pVDZ basis). Blue curves indicate the NNQS energy during the training process.
AFQMC is carried out with NNQS trial wave functions optimized at 4,6,8,10,12×10                           4 steps
correspondingly,  denoted  in  the  figure  with  blue  dots.   The  green  shaded  region  indicates
the chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol), and the red shaded region specifies the convergence of
NNQS-AFQMC.


    One important parameter in the integration of our approach is the number of configu-

rations,P,  as defined in Eq. 25.  This parameter directly determines the efficiency of our

implementation.   To  investigate  its  behavior,  NNQS-AFQMC  calculations  are  performed

with differentPvalues.  Representative results for N     2 at a bond length of 4.2 Bohr, obtained

using an NNQS trial wavefunction after 12×10         4  iterations,are illustrated in Fig.  3.  The

data show that NNQS-AFQMC attains chemical accuracy whenP≥200, and convergence

is achieved aroundP= 400.  The decrease in both the systematic energy error and statis-

tical uncertainty asPincreases aligns with the findings reported in Ref.,        35  underscoring a

                                                         22
fundamental characteristic of the stochastic sampling process employed in the integration of

AFQMC with many-body trial wave functions.  Throughout our study of N2, a configuration

number ofP= 400 was sufficient to ensure convergence of all NNQS-AFQMC calculations.

We  also  observed  that  the  choice  ofPis  almost  consistent  across  different  training  steps

in the study of N2.  More specifically, in all of our tested cases,P= 400 is enough for all

NNQS trial wave functions (i.e., optimized with 4×10       4 to 12×10         4 steps) to obtain converged

AFQMC results.As detailed in Sec. 3, the computational cost of our NNQS-AFQMC imple-

mentation scales sub-linearly toP. The computational cost of NNQS-AFQMC is comparable

to that of AFQMC using CAS trial wave functions, where generallyO(10                       3) configurations

can be efficiently processed.56






















Figure 4:  Energy deviation of NNQS-AFQMC vs.  the number of Metropolis samples (P)
for N2 at 4.2 Bohr (cc-pVDZ basis).  Calculations are performed with the same NNQS trial
wave  function  and  parameters,  except  for  the  number  of  Metropolis  samplesP.   NNQS
denotes the trial energy of the NNQS trial wave function.  The green shaded region indicates
the chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol), and the red shaded region specifies the convergence of
NNQS-AFQMC.


    Based on the above studies, we applied NNQS-AFQMC to N2  at 4.2 Bohr with larger
cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets,  H2O molecule with cc-pVDZ basis set,  and benchmark

                                                       23
with  other  accurate  methods.   All  calculations  were  performed  with  the  same  setup  and

AFQMC parameters, as described in Sec.  4.  To evaluate the sensitivity to sample size, we

tested four values of the parameterP:  100, 200, 400, and 800.  The results, summarized in

Table. 1, demonstrate that NNQS-AFQMC consistently achieves high accuracy across both

molecular systems and basis sets using a fixed set of parameters.  Notably, a sample size of

P= 400 is proved sufficient to maintain chemical accuracy in all cases.  Additional wall-time

data are provided in APPENDIX. D to further illustrate the computational performance of

our approach.

Table 1:  Total energies (in Eh) for the N2 and H2O molecules computed using the NNQS-
AFQMC method with different sample sizeP, benchmarking with other methods.  The N           2
molecule was studied at a bond length of 4.2 Bohr with the cc-pVXZ (X = D, T, Q) basis
sets, while H2O was computed at O–H bond length of 0.94237   ˚A and H–O–H bond angle of
107.17°using the cc-pVDZ basis set.  FCI data is obtained with PySCF.                53

             Method                  H2O(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVTZ)    N2(cc-pVQZ)
         NNQS (trial)                   -76.2408            -108.9569          -109.0452          -109.0865
   NNQS-AFQMC P=100         -76.2437(4)        -108.9727(8)      -109.067(1)       -109.121(2)
   NNQS-AFQMC P=200         -76.2433(3)        -108.9720(7)      -109.066(1)       -109.118(1)
   NNQS-AFQMC P=400         -76.2431(3)        -108.9704(5)     -109.0633(9)      -109.119(1)
   NNQS-AFQMC P=800         -76.2427(2)        -108.9703(6)     -109.0634(7)      -109.117(1)
                FCI                          -76.24248                 —                     —                     —
            DMRG57                           —                -108.97009               —                     —
            CDFCI58                           —                -108.97013               —              -109.11668
        UCCSD(T)57,59                 -76.24187          -108.96299        -109.05442         -109.1117
          UCCSDT57                         —                -108.96685         -109.0585               —
       QMC/MCSCF57                     —               -108.9673(5)     -109.0629(7)             —
         fp-AFQMC59                        —                 -108.9702               —               -109.1192
 fp-AFQMC/UCCSD(T)59              —                      —                     —               -109.1189



5    Summary and discussion

In this work, we introduced an integration of NNQS with AFQMC. Our approach builds upon

recent progress in AFQMC35 and adapts it to the latest NNQS formalisms.  Such integration

leverage the variational flexibility of NNQS to construct an optimized trial wavefunction that


                                                          24
significantly enhances the accuracy of AFQMC simulations.  The integration is rigorously

tested  on  N2  molecules  under  systematic  bond  stretching,  spanning  weakly  correlated  to

strongly  correlated  regimes.   Across  all  regimes,  our  method  systematically  yields  results

around exactness, showcasing its potential for tackling challenging quantum systems.

    This work highlights the versatility of the framework in the original work 35  and intro-

duces  a  detailed  implementation  of  stochastic  sampling  to  more  general  many-body  trial

wavefunctions.  It is noticed that, as discussed in Sec. 3, the precomputed dataset utilized

for sampling does not depend on the specific form of the trial wavefunction.  Once a desired

pre-computed dataset is obtained, the following AFQMC algorithm can be processed with

a  trial  wavefunction  described  by  such  pre-computed  dataset.   Therefore,  our  integration

is not limited to the detailed NNQS format and can be extended to a broad class of trial
wavefunctions that previously suffered from the scaling in their AFQMC implementations.

Notably, this methodology seamlessly accommodates Configuration Interaction (CI) excited

states,  including  those  derived  from  CAS,23,24  SHCI,32  and  CISD.33  In  these  cases,  their

CI configurations can be directly deposited as pre-computed datasets.  Following stochas-

tic sampling from such pre-computed datasets, together with carefully designed fast update

algorithms, can significantly reduce computational scales compared to traditional AFQMC

approaches.

    Other  quantum  chemical  methods  can  also  benefit  from  the  development  of  AFQMC,

especially  VMC  methods.   A  conceptual  understanding  of  AFQMC  here  is  to  view  it  as

a fair approximation of long-time imaginary time evolutione    −β    ˆH  that now can be applied

to  many-body  wavefunctions.   Such  AFQMC  approximation  of  long-time  imaginary  time
evolution is free of the sign problem, and its quality is associated with the choice of many-

body  trial  wavefunctions.   In  light  of  these  characteristics,  AFQMC  emerges  as  a  robust

validation framework for VMC results.  By adopting VMC optimized wavefunctions as trial

wavefunctions in AFQMC, researchers can conduct rigorous assessments of VMC predictions,

thereby enhancing the overall reliability of the computational outcomes.  Beyond validation,


                                                        25
AFQMC can offer valuable insights into the detailed optimization processes within VMC,

such as guiding the choice of variational parameters or suggesting more efficient sampling

strategies.   This  bidirectional  exchange  of  ideas  and  methodologies  holds  the  promise  of

driving significant advancements in the field of quantum chemistry, enabling more accurate

and efficient exploration of many-body quantum systems.


6    Data Availability


The code for QiankunNet and the data that support the findings of this study are available

from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


Acknowledgement


This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. T2222026).

This work was mainly supported by the Supercomputing Center of the USTC. Part of this

work was carried out with the support of Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences.


References


 (1)Carleo, G.; Troyer, M. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural

      networks.   Science2017,      355, 602–606.

 (2)Choo, K.; Neupert, T.; Carleo, G. Study of the two-dimensional frustratedJ                            1−J    2 model

      studied with neural network quantum states.            Phys.   Rev.  B2019,     100, 125124.

 (3)Sharir, O.; Levine, Y.; Wies, N.; Carleo, G.; Shashua, A. Deep Autoregressive Models

      for the Efficient Variational Simulation of Many-Body Quantum Systems.                     Phys.   Rev.

      Lett.2020,     124, 020503.




                                                     26
 (4)Schmitt, M.; Heyl, M. Quantum Many-Body Dynamics in Two Dimensions with Arti-

      ficial Neural Networks.      Phys.   Rev.  Lett.2020,     125, 100503.

 (5)Yuan, D.; Wang, H.-R.; Wang, Z.; Deng, D.-L. Solving the Liouvillian Gap with Arti-

      ficial Neural Networks.      Phys.   Rev.  Lett.2021,     126, 160401.

 (6)Zhao, X.; Li, M.; Xiao, Q.; Chen, J.; Wang, F.; Shen, L.; Zhao, M.; Wu, W.; An, H.;

      He, L.; Liang, X. AI for Quantum Mechanics:  High Performance Quantum Many-Body

      Simulations via Deep Learning. SC22:  International Conference for High Performance

      Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. 2022; pp 1–15.

 (7)Moreno, J. R.; Carleo, G.; Georges, A.; Stokes, J. Fermionic wave functions from neural-

      network constrained hidden states.          Proceedings     of the  National    Academy      of Sciences
      2022,   119, e2122059119.

 (8)Zhao, T.;  Stokes, J.;  Veerapaneni, S. Scalable neural quantum states architecture for

      quantum chemistry.       arXiv:2208.056372022,

 (9)Choo,  K.;  Mezzacapo,  A.;  Carleo,  G.  Fermionic  neural-network  states  for  ab-initio

      electronic structure.    Nature    communications2020,          11, 2368.

(10)Barrett, T. D.; Malyshev, A.; Lvovsky, A. Autoregressive neural-network wavefunctions

      for ab initio quantum chemistry.         Nature   Machine    Intelligence2022,      4, 351–358.

(11)Shang,  H.;  Guo,  C.;  Wu,  Y.;  Li,  Z.;  Yang,  J.  Solving  Schr¨odinger  Equation  with  a

      Language Model.       arXiv:2307.093432023,

(12)Wu, Y.; Guo, C.; Fan, Y.; Zhou, P.; Shang, H. NNQS-Transformer:  An Efficient and

      Scalable  Neural  Network  Quantum  States  Approach  for  Ab  Initio  Quantum  Chem-

      istry.  Proceedings  of the  International Conference  for High  Performance Computing,

      Networking, Storage and Analysis. New York, NY, USA, 2023.




                                                      27
(13)Li,  X.;  Huang,  J.-C.;  Zhang,  G.-Z.;  Li,  H.-E.;  Shen,  Z.-P.;  Zhao,  C.;  Li,  J.;  Hu,  H.-

      S. Improved Optimization for the Neural-network Quantum States and Tests on the

      Chromium Dimer.         arXiv:2404.092802024,

(14)Hermann,  J.;  Sch¨atzle,  Z.;  No´e,  F.  Deep-neural-network  solution  of  the  electronic

      Schr¨odinger equation.      Nature    Chemistry2020,        12, 891–897.

(15)Pfau, D.; Spencer, J. S.; Matthews, A. G. D. G.; Foulkes, W. M. C. Ab initio solution

      of the many-electron Schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks.                   Phys.   Rev.  Res.

      2020,   2, 033429.

(16)Sobral, J. A.; Perle, M.; Scheurer, M. S. Physics-informed Transformers for Electronic

      Quantum States. 2024;https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12248.

(17)Zheng, B.-X.; Chung, C.-M.; Corboz, P.; Ehlers, G.; Qin, M.-P.; Noack, R. M.; Shi, H.;

      White, S. R.; Zhang, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. Stripe order in the underdoped region of the

      two-dimensional Hubbard model.            Science2017,       358, 1155–1160.

(18)Xu, H.; Chung, C.-M.; Qin, M.; Schollw¨ock, U.; White, S. R.; Zhang, S. Coexistence

      of superconductivity with partially filled stripes in the Hubbard model.                  Science2024,

      384, eadh7691.

(19)Motta, M.; Genovese, C.; Ma, F.; Cui, Z.-H.; Sawaya, R.; Chan, G. K.; Chepiga, N.;

      Helms, P.; Jimenez-Hoyos, C.; Millis, A. J.; others Ground-state properties of the hy-

      drogen chain:  insulator-to-metal transition, dimerization, and magnetic phases.                    arXiv
      preprint   arXiv:1911.016182019,

(20)Bistritzer,  R.;   MacDonald,  A.  H.  Moir´e  bands  in  twisted  double-layer  graphene.

      Proceedings     of the  National    Academy     of Sciences2011,       108, 12233–12237.

(21)Motta, M.;  Zhang, S. Ab initio computations of molecular systems by the auxiliary-




                                                       28
      field quantum Monte Carlo method.              WIREs     Computational       Molecular    Science2018,

      8, e1364.

(22)Lee,  J.;  Pham,  H.  Q.;  Reichman,  D.  R.  Twenty  Years  of  Auxiliary-Field  Quantum

      Monte Carlo in Quantum Chemistry:  An Overview and Assessment on Main Group

      Chemistry and Bond-Breaking.            Journal    of Chemical     Theory    and   Computation2022,

      18, 7024–7042, PMID: 36255074.

(23)Shi, H.; Zhang, S. Some recent developments in auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo

      for real materials.    The   Journal   of  Chemical    Physics2021,       154, 024107.

(24)Morales,  M.  A.;  McMinis,  J.;  Clark,  B.  K.;  Kim,  J.;  Scuseria,  G.  E.  Multidetermi-

      nant  Wave  Functions  in  Quantum  Monte  Carlo.                Journal    of Chemical      Theory    and
      Computation2012,          8, 2181–2188, PMID: 26588949.

(25)Shi, H.; Zhang, S. Symmetry in auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo calculations.                       Phys.

      Rev.   B2013,     88, 125132.

(26)Carlson,  J.;  Gandolfi,  S.;  Schmidt,  K.  E.;  Zhang,  S.  Auxiliary-field  quantum  Monte

      Carlo method for strongly paired fermions.             Phys.  Rev.   A2011,     84, 061602.

(27)Vitali, E.; Rosenberg, P.; Zhang, S. Calculating ground-state properties of correlated

      fermionic systems with BCS trial wave functions in Slater determinant path-integral

      approaches.    Phys.   Rev.   A2019,     100, 023621.

(28)Xiao,  Z.-Y.;  Shi,  H.;  Zhang,  S.  Pseudo-BCS  wave  function  from  density  matrix  de-
      composition:  Application in auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo.                 Phys.   Rev.   Research

      2021,   3, 013065.

(29)LeBlanc, J. P. F.; Antipov, A. E.; Becca, F.; Bulik, I. W.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Chung, C.-M.;

      Deng, Y.; Ferrero, M.; Henderson, T. M.; Jim´enez-Hoyos, C. A.; Kozik, E.; Liu, X.-W.;

      Millis,  A.  J.;  Prokof’ev,  N.  V.;  Qin,  M.;  Scuseria,  G.  E.;  Shi,  H.;  Svistunov,  B.  V.;


                                                       29
      Tocchio, L. F.; Tupitsyn, I. S.; White, S. R.; Zhang, S.; Zheng, B.-X.; Zhu, Z.; Gull, E.

      Solutions of  the Two-Dimensional Hubbard  Model:  Benchmarks and  Results from  a

      Wide Range of Numerical Algorithms.             Phys.   Rev.   X2015,     5, 041041.

(30)Williams, K. T.; Yao, Y.; Li, J.; Chen, L.; Shi, H.; Motta, M.; Niu, C.; Ray, U.; Guo, S.;

      Anderson, R. J.; Li, J.; Tran, L. N.; Yeh, C.-N.; Mussard, B.; Sharma, S.; Bruneval, F.;

      van  Schilfgaarde,  M.;  Booth,  G.  H.;  Chan,  G.  K.-L.;  Zhang,  S.;  Gull,  E.;  Zgid,  D.;

      Millis, A.; Umrigar, C. J.; Wagner, L. K. Direct Comparison of Many-Body Methods

      for Realistic Electronic Hamiltonians.         Phys.   Rev.   X2020,     10, 011041.

(31)Shee, J.; Weber, J. L.; Reichman, D. R.; Friesner, R. A.; Zhang, S. On the potentially

      transformative role of auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo in quantum chemistry:  A
      highly  accurate  method  for  transition  metals  and  beyond.            The   Journal    of Chemical

      Physics2023,      158, 140901.

(32)Mahajan, A.; Lee, J.; Sharma, S. Selected configuration interaction wave functions in

      phaseless auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo.            The   Journal   of Chemical    Physics2022,

      156, 174111.

(33)Mahajan,  A.;  Thorpe,  J.  H.;  Kurian,  J.  S.;  Reichman,  D.  R.;  Matthews,  D.  A.;

      Sharma, S. Beyond CCSD (T) accuracy at lower scaling with auxiliary field quantum

      Monte Carlo.     Journal    of Chemical    Theory    and   Computation2025,         21, 1626–1642.

(34)Sukurma,  Z.;  Schlipf,  M.;  Kresse,  G.  Self-Refinement  of  Auxiliary-Field  Quantum

      Monte  Carlo  via  Non-Orthogonal  Configuration  Interaction.                  Journal    of  Chemical
      Theory    and  Computation2025,          21, 4481–4493.

(35)Xiao, Z.-Y.; Lu, Z.; Chen, Y.; Xiang, T.; Zhang, S. Implementing advanced trial wave

      functions in fermion quantum Monte Carlo via stochastic sampling.                    arXiv:2505.18519

      2025,



                                                       30
(36)Purwanto, W.; Krakauer, H.; Virgus, Y.; Zhang, S. Assessing weak hydrogen binding

      on Ca+ centers:  An accurate many-body study with large basis sets.                    The   Journal   of

      Chemical    Physics2011,      135, 164105.

(37)Shee, J.; Arthur, E. J.; Zhang, S.; Reichman, D. R.; Friesner, R. A. Phaseless Auxiliary-

      Field  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  on  Graphical  Processing  Units.                 Journal    of Chemical

      Theory    and  Computation2018,         14, 4109–4121, PMID: 29897748.

(38)Suzuki,  M.  Relationship  between  d-Dimensional  Quantal  Spin  Systems  and  (d+1)-

      Dimensional Ising Systems:  Equivalence, Critical Exponents and Systematic Approxi-

      mants of the Partition Function and Spin Correlations.              Progress   of Theoretical    Physics

      1976,   56, 1454–1469.

(39)Trotter,  H.  F.  On  the  Product  of  Semi-Groups  of  Operators.                 Proceedings     of  the

      American     Mathematical     Society1959,      10, 545–551.

(40)Hubbard, J. Calculation of Partition Functions.              Phys.   Rev.   Lett.1959,     3, 77–78.

(41)Stratonovich,  R.  L.  On  a  Method  of  Calculating  Quantum  Distribution  Functions.

      Soviet  Physics   Doklady1957,        2, 416.

(42)Zhang, S. In     Many-Body       Methods    for Real  Materials; Pavarini, E., Koch, E., Zhang, S.,

      Eds.; Verlag des Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, 2019.

(43)Zhang, S.;  Carlson, J.;  Gubernatis, J. E. Constrained path Monte Carlo method for

      fermion ground states.      Phys.   Rev.   B1997,     55, 7464–7477.

(44)Zhang,  S.;  Krakauer,  H.  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Method  using  Phase-Free  Random

      Walks with Slater Determinants.          Phys.   Rev.  Lett.2003,     90, 136401.

(45)Purwanto, W.; Zhang, S. Quantum Monte Carlo method for the ground state of many-

      boson systems.     Phys.   Rev.  E2004,     70, 056702.



                                                      31
(46)Purwanto, W.; Krakauer, H.; Zhang, S. Pressure-induced diamond toβ-tin transition

      in bulk silicon:  A quantum Monte Carlo study.             Phys.   Rev.  B2009,      80, 214116.

(47)Motta, M.; Zhang, S. Computation of Ground-State Properties in Molecular Systems:

      Back-Propagation  with  Auxiliary-Field  Quantum  Monte  Carlo.                  Journal   of  Chemical

      Theory    and  Computation2017,          13, 5367–5378, PMID: 29053270.

(48)Vitali, E.; Rosenberg, P.; Zhang, S. Calculating ground-state properties of correlated

      fermionic systems with BCS trial wave functions in Slater determinant path-integral

      approaches.    Phys.   Rev.   A2019,     100, 023621.

(49)Shi, H.;  Zhang, S. Many-body computations by stochastic sampling in Hartree-Fock-

      Bogoliubov space.      Phys.   Rev.  B2017,      95, 045144.

(50)Jiang,  T.;  O’Gorman,  B.;  Mahajan,  A.;  Lee,  J.  Unbiasing  fermionic  auxiliary-field

      quantum Monte Carlo with matrix product state trial wavefunctions.                     Phys.   Rev.  Res.

      2025,   7, 013038.

(51)Chan, G. K.-L.; K´allay, M.; Gauss, J. State-of-the-art density matrix renormalization

      group and coupled cluster theory studies of the nitrogen binding curve.                 The   Journal   of

      Chemical    Physics2004,       121, 6110–6116.

(52)Al-Saidi, W. A.; Zhang, S.; Krakauer, H. Bond breaking with auxiliary-field quantum

      Monte Carlo.     The   Journal   of chemical    physics2007,      127  14, 144101.

(53)Sun, Q.;  Berkelbach, T. C.;  Blunt, N. S.; Booth, G. H.;  Guo, S.; Li, Z.; Liu, J.;  Mc-
      Clain, J. D.; Sayfutyarova, E. R.; Sharma, S.; Wouters, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. PySCF: the

      Python-based simulations of chemistry framework.                WIREs      Computational      Molecular

      Science2018,      8, e1340.

(54)Sun, Q.; Zhang, X.; Banerjee, S.; Bao, P.; Barbry, M.; Blunt, N. S.; Bogdanov, N. A.;

      Booth,  G.  H.;  Chen,  J.;  Cui,  Z.-H.;  Eriksen,  J.  J.;  Gao,  Y.;  Guo,  S.;  Hermann,  J.;


                                                       32
      Hermes, M. R.; Koh, K.; Koval, P.; Lehtola, S.; Li, Z.; Liu, J.; Mardirossian, N.; Mc-

      Clain, J. D.; Motta, M.; Mussard, B.; Pham, H. Q.; Pulkin, A.; Purwanto, W.; Robin-

      son, P.  J.;  Ronca, E.;  Sayfutyarova, E. R.;  Scheurer, M.;  Schurkus, H. F.;  Smith, J.

      E. T.; Sun, C.; Sun, S.-N.; Upadhyay, S.; Wagner, L. K.; Wang, X.; White, A.; Whit-

      field,  J.  D.;  Williamson,  M.  J.;  Wouters,  S.;  Yang,  J.;  Yu,  J.  M.;  Zhu,  T.;  Berkel-

      bach, T. C.; Sharma, S.; Sokolov, A. Y.; Chan, G. K.-L. Recent developments in the

      PySCF program package.          The   Journal   of Chemical     Physics2020,      153, 024109.

(55)Liu, A.-J.; Clark, B. K. Efficient optimization of neural network backflow for ab-initio

      quantum chemistry.       arXiv:2502.188432025,

(56)Malone, F. D.; Mahajan, A.; Spencer, J. S.; Lee, J. ipie:  A Python-Based Auxiliary-
      Field  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Program  with  Flexibility  and  Efficiency  on  CPUs  and

      GPUs.     Journal   of  Chemical     Theory    and   Computation2023,           19,  109–121,  PMID:

      36503227.

(57)Al-Saidi, W. A.; Zhang, S.; Krakauer, H. Bond breaking with auxiliary-field quantum

      Monte Carlo.     The   Journal   of chemical    physics2007,      127.

(58)Zhang, Y.; Gao, W.; Li, Y. Parallel Multicoordinate Descent Methods for Full Configu-

      ration Interaction.    Journal   of Chemical    Theory    and  Computation2025,         21, 2325–2337.

(59)Mahajan, A.;  Sharma, S. Taming the sign problem in auxiliary-field quantum Monte

      Carlo  using  accurate  wave  functions.       Journal    of Chemical     Theory    and   Computation

      2021,   17, 4786–4798.












                                                      33
Appendices

A    Details for NNQS-AFQMC


In this section, we elaborate on the details of implementing AFQMC with NNQS trial wave-

function through stochastic sampling, which can be divided into three main steps:  initial-

ization, propagation, and measurement.


A.1    Initialization

The precomputed dataset for NNQS is constructed below:

    •generate  CI  representations  of  NNQS  trial  wavefunction.   In  this  work,  we  take  all

       configurations used in NNQS estimation.

    •sort all configurations from largest to smallest according to the absolute value of their

       coefficients.

    •label  sorted  configurations  from  1  toN   tot  correspondingly.   Without  loss  of  general-

       ity, we take 1 to specify the configuration with the largest coefficient andN   tot  to be

       the  least.N     tot  indicates  the  total  number  of  configurations  to  represent  the  NNQS

       wavefunction.

    With a precomputed dataset, we can initialize the sampled trial wavefunction


                                                    PX    ΨT (x p)⟨x  p|
                                       ⟨Ψ  0T,k|=      ΨT (x p)⟨x  p|ϕ 0k⟩,                                          (31)
                                                  p=1

wherex     p indicates the sampled labels that range from 1 toN  tot and|ϕ         0k⟩here is chosen to

be RHF wavefunction.  The sampling ofx  p with probability


                                     P(x  p;ϕ) = ΨT (x p)⟨x  p|ϕ⟩ /N(ϕ)

                                                        34
can be done by the standard Metropolis process:

    •Initialize  a  set  of{x    p}.   In  our  work,x     p  is  chosen  to  be  the  labels  of  the  largestP

       configurations.

    •Metropolis updatex     p according to|ϕ      0k⟩:

           –samplex     ′p with probabilityp(x   p).  In our work, we samplex    ′p from [x p−P,x  p +P]

              with even probability.

           –accept sampledx      ′p according to ratio


                                                      α= |Ψ T (x ′p)⟨x ′p|ϕ i+1k ⟩|
                                                             |Ψ T (x p)⟨x  p|ϕ i+1k ⟩|.

              Ifx ′p is accepted, setx   p =x ′p.

           –iterate above to reach equilibrium.


A.2    Propagation

Basic theories for the propagation are discussed in Sec. 2.2.  Here, we provide the implemen-

tation details:

   1.AFQMC advance walkers to|ϕ    i+1k ⟩from|ϕ      ik⟩according to⟨Ψ    iT,k|:

           •sample a fieldywith probabilityp(y) ,

           •evaluate dynamic shift

                                                     yik,γ =− √τ⟨Ψ iT,k|ˆLγ|ϕ ik⟩⟨Ψ iT,k|ϕ ik⟩

              and
                                      I(y,   yik,ϕik) = p(y−       yik) ⟨Ψ iT,k| ˆB(y−    yik)|ϕ ik⟩
                                                              p(y)              ⟨Ψ iT,k|ϕ ik⟩    .

              where ΨiT,k represents the trial wavefunction ΨT  sampled ati-th propagation step

              onk-th walker

                                                             35
           •advance walker

                                                      |ϕ i+1k ⟩=   ˆB(y−    yik)|ϕ ik⟩


           •assign weightW  i+1k     under the phaseless approximation:


                               Wi+1                     yik,ϕik)∗max[0,cos(Arg   ⟨Ψ iT,k|ϕ i+1k ⟩
                                  k     =W  ik∗I(y,                                       ⟨Ψ iT,k|ϕ ik⟩  )].


   2.Metropolis updatex      p according to|ϕ  i+1k ⟩:

           •samplex  ′p with probabilityp(x   p).  In our work, we samplex    ′p from [x p−P,x  p +P]

              with even probability.

           •accept sampledx      ′p according to ratio


                                                       α= |⟨Ψ T|x′p⟩⟨x ′p|ϕ 0k⟩||⟨Ψ T|x p⟩⟨x  p|ϕ 0k⟩|.


              Ifx ′p is accepted, setx   p =x ′p or setx  ′p =x  p.

           •iterate above to reach equilibrium.

   3.Evaluate ∆θ   T  and update weightW i+1k     =W  i+1k ∗max[0,cos(∆θ             T )] according to Eq. 30.


A.3    Measurement

The measurement described in Eq. 20 then can be evaluated with⟨Ψ     T|=⟨Ψ   nT,k|at stepn

through                                                      P
                                                                       ⟨Ψ nT,k| ˆH|ϕ  nk⟩
                                        ⟨Ψ T| ˆH|Ψ  n⟩          kWnkP   ⟨Ψ nT,k|ϕnk⟩
                                          ⟨Ψ T|Ψ n⟩    =               kWnk    .                                        (32)
To further reduce the statistic error, we can again apply Metropolis update on auxiliary fields

xp in⟨Ψ   nT,k|to sample a set of new auxiliary fieldsx   ′p and related⟨           ˜ΨnT,k|.  The measurements






                                                             36
in Eq. 32 then can be updated through


                                              ⟨Ψ nT,k|→⟨ ˜ΨnT,k|                                                     (33)


and                                                     PP ′
                                        Wnk →W  nk∗     PPp′=1S(x ′p′)

                                                           p=1 S(x  p)                                              (34)
withS(x    ′p′) andS(x      p) to specify related sign ratio.


B    Naive implementation of AFQMC with NNQS trial

       wavefunction through multi-determinants


Fig.  5 demonstrates the superiority of our stochastic sampling in integrating AFQMC with

NNQS  trial  wavefunctions  compared  to  traditional  AFQMC  with  multi-determinant  trial

wavefunctions (MD-AFQMC). The figure inherits the NNQS-AFQMC results from Fig.  4,

supplemented with MD-AFQMC using a truncated expansion of the target NNQS. The blue

curve  in  Fig.   3  represents  MD-AFQMC  employing  multi-determinant  trial  wavefunctions

that consist of theO(10           3) configurations with the largest coefficients from the NNQS trial

wave function used in NNQS-AFQMC. Conceptually, this truncated expansion approximates
the full NNQS as the number of configurations increases; however, accurately capturing the

NNQS  typically  requiresO(10                     5)  configurations,  which  is  computationally  infeasible.   The

main difference between MD-AFQMC and NNQS-AFQMC here is that all configurations in

the multi-determinant trial wave function are fixed during the propagation of MD-AFQMC,

while  NNQS-AFQMC  allows  these  configurations  to  be  dynamically  updated  during  the

propagation of walkers to explore all relevant configurations.  Therefore, there is a persistent

“truncated  error”  for  MD-AFQMC.  Since  the  computational  cost  of  these  two  methods

shares the same scale with the number of (sampled) configurations, except NNQS-AFQMC

requires an extra process to update sampled configurations.  We directly compare these two

                                                      37
methods in one figure.  As presented, compared to NNQS-AFQMC which converges around

P= 400, a deviation around 2.5 mHa is still observed in MD-AFQMC, even thoughPis

chosen to be 6×10      3.  This comparison highlights the necessity of our stochastic sampling in

integrating AFQMC with NNQS trial wavefunctions.

























Figure 5:  Comparison of NNQS-AFQMC with MD-AFQMC for N2  at 4.2 Bohr (cc-pVDZ
basis). Both methods aim to implement the same NNQS trial wave function. NNQS-AFQMC
is implemented through stochastic sampling withPsampled configurations.  MD-AFQMC
employing multi-determinant trial wavefunctions that consist of thePconfigurations with
the largest coefficients in NNQS. The green shaded region indicates the chemical accuracy
(1 kcal/mol), and the red shaded region specifies the convergence of NNQS-AFQMC.



C    Thermalization in the stochastic sampling of NNQS

The stochastic implementation of the many-body trial wave function to AFQMC requires

corresponding MCMC procedures to sample in equilibrium. As demonstrated in Sec. A, ther-

malization to ensure equilibrium is necessary in both the initialization of AFQMC (Sec. A.1)

and during the propagation of walkers (Sec. A.2).  The burn-in steps (i.e., the thermalization

                                                    38
steps to ensure equilibrium) in the initialization of AFQMC and the propagation of walkers

should then be carefully investigated.

    During our study of NNQS-AFQMC, we found that the burn-in steps in the initialization

of AFQMC are system-dependent.  For N2 at stretched bond lengths (R= 2.7–4.2 Bohr), 500

burn-in steps achieve full thermalization, yielding converged NNQS-AFQMC energies.  How-

ever, for systems around equilibrium configurations (R  eq = 2.118 Bohr andR= 2.4 Bohr):

the minimal burn-in length increased to 16,000 steps.  The substantially increased burn-in

steps required for near-equilibrium geometries primarily stem from heightened probability

concentration within the configuration space.  At 2.118 Bohr, for instance, the Hartree-Fock

(HF) state dominates the ensemble with a 93.65% statistical weight.  Such extreme prob-

ability localization severely impedes Metropolis sampling efficiency:  Walkers initialized in
the HF state exhibit exponentially suppressed transition probabilities to other configurations

due to extremely small acceptance ratios (α≪1).

    Fortunately,  once equilibrium is reached in the initialization of AFQMC, the following

burn-in steps in the propagation of walkers are negligible.  This is because,  as outlined in

Sec. A.2, MCMC procedures to sampled⟨Ψ        i+1T,k|are directly updated on configurationsx              p from

the last step propagation (i.e., in sampling of⟨Ψ   iT,k|), and each step of AFQMC propagation

|ϕ ik⟩→|ϕ i+1k ⟩is only separated by a sufficient small time sliceτ. This observation is similar to

Ref.35 where VAFQMC trial wave functions are sampled in auxiliary field space.  Though an

extensive burn-in step may be necessary in the initialization of AFQMC, the computational

cost to reach the equilibrium of MCMC is negligible in the whole AFQMC process.


D Wall-times for NNQS-AFQMC calculations


The computational efficiency of the NNQS-AFQMC method is assessed by measuring the

wall-times for the systems listed in Table.1:  N2  at 4.2 Bohr with larger cc-pVTZ and cc-
pVQZ basis sets, H2O molecule with cc-pVDZ basis set.  The corresponding wall-times are



                                                      39
summarized in Table.2 and Table.3 respectively, for the NNQS (GPU) and AFQMC (CPU)

components under various sample sizesP.

Table 2:  Wall-times (in seconds) for one step of optimization in the NNQS components of
the NNQS-AFQMC calculations.  The following wall time measurements were obtained using
16 NVIDIA A800 GPUs.

          walltime(s)     H2O(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVTZ)    N2(cc-pVQZ)
        NNQS(GPU)            0.57                    0.89                  2.62                 12.25


Table 3:  Wall-times (in seconds) for the whole AFQMC components of the NNQS-AFQMC
calculations.  AFQMC is performed with 128 AMD EPYC 7543 CPU cores.

    walltime(s)                     H2O(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVDZ)    N2(cc-pVTZ)    N2(cc-pVQZ)
                       P=100            1928                   2865                 8152                31667
 AFQMC(CPU)            P=200            2717                   5690                 15193                64140
                       P=400            5367                  11310                29212               126679
                       P=800           14530                 23187                58202               251995



E The “sorted labeling” strategy in MCMC


To quantitatively evaluate the performance of our proposing strategy, we compared the aver-

age acceptance ratios of two distinct proposal generation methods:  (1) the “sorted labeling”

strategy  introduced  in  our  paper,  and  (2)  a  random  hopping  strategy,  where  an  electron

is  randomly  annihilated  from  an  occupied  orbital  and  another  is  randomly  created  on  an
unoccupied orbital to get a new configuration.

    For both strategies,  400 independent Markov chains were initialized from the Hartree-

Fock state, and each chain performed 1000 MCMC updates.  The resulting average accep-

tance ratios, summarized in Table 4, demonstrate a markedly higher acceptance rate using

the sorted labeling strategy.

    This improvement in the “sorted labeling” strategy benefits from the concentrated dis-

tribution of weights for each configuration in describing NNQS trial wave functions.  Based



                                                        40
on the MCMC algorithm, the acceptance of new configurations is determined by the over-

lap ratio between the old configuration and the newly proposed configuration.  Since “the

magnitude of coefficients is associated with the importance of configurations”, overlap ratios

are highly relevant to the value of weights, and configurations with similar weights have a

larger probability to be accepted.  As demonstrated in Fig. 6, the weights of NNQS are highly

concentrated in configuration space.  Instead of randomly proposing a new configuration, our

design of the proposal process allows newly updated configurations to share similar weights

with the old configuration, which significantly increases the acceptance ratios.






















Figure 6:  Distribution of weights for configurations in the precomputed dataset in the study
of N2 with 4.2 Bohr bond length at cc-pVDZ basis.  This precomputed dataset is obtained
from the NNQS optimization at 12×10         4 steps.


Table 4:  Average acceptance ratio for different propose strategies in the test cases.  For both
strategies, 400 independent Markov chains were initialized from the Hartree-Fock state, and
each chain underwent 1000 MCMC updates with the corresponding propose strategies.

                                  Propose strategy    Acceptance ratio
                                   Sorted labeling              0.143
                                  Random hopping           0.00037




                                                       41
TOC Graphic






















































                            42