  Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents


   Saswata Jana1         ⋆, Giuseppe F. Italiano2         , and Partha Sarathi Mandal1


               1  Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India
                                2  Luiss University, Rome, Italy




        Abstract.  This paper considers the Hamiltonian walk problem in the
        multi-agent coordination framework, referred to as k-agents Hamiltonian
        walk  problem  (k-HWP).  In  this  problem,  a  set  of  k  connected  agents
        collectively compute a spanning walk of a given undirected graph in the
        minimum steps. At each step, the agents are at k distinct vertices and
        the induced subgraph made by the occupied vertices remains connected.
        In the next consecutive steps, each agent may remain stationary or move
        to  one  of  its  neighbours.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  this  problem
        has not been previously explored in the context of multi-agent systems
        with  connectivity.  As  a  generalization  of  the  well-known  Hamiltonian
        walk problem (when k = 1), k-HWP is NP-hard. We propose a (3−  121)-
        approximation algorithm for 2-HWP on arbitrary graphs. For the tree,
        we  define  a  restricted  version  of  the  problem  and  present  an  optimal
        algorithm  for  arbitrary  values  of  k.  Finally,  we  formalize  the  problem
        for k-uniform hypergraphs and present a 2(1 + ln k)-approximation algo-
        rithm. This result is also adapted to design an approximation algorithm
        for k-HWP on general graphs when k = O(1).


Keywords:  Approximation Algorithms; Graph Traversal; Mobile Agent;
Hamiltonian Walk; Hypergraphs.

1    Introduction

Graph  traversal  is  a  fundamental  problem  in  computer  science  and  robotics,
where the goal is to visit every node of a graph at least once. A key objective of
graph traversal is to minimize the number of steps needed to traverse the entire
graph.  Typically,  such  tasks  can  be  accomplished  by  a  single  agent.  However,
relying on a single agent can be inefficient, prone to failure, and unsuitable for
large or complex environments. These limitations motivate the need for multi-
agent systems, where the agents coordinate among themselves to traverse the
whole graph while reducing the traversal time and handling failures effectively.
One major challenge in coordinating multiple agents is ensuring safe and reli-
able  communication  during  the  traversal.  In  many  practical  systems,  such  as
swarm  robotics  or  drone  networks,  connectivity  among  agents  is  essential  to

⋆ Supported by Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship (PMRF) scheme of the Govt. of
  India (PMRF-ID: 1902165)
2           Jana et al.

maintain real-time coordination, prevent collisions, and quickly react to unex-
pected  failures.  In  addition,  the  connectivity  constraint  also  plays  a  key  role
in fault-tolerant settings. For instance, if one agent fails, the connected agents
can detect the failure and either compensate for the loss or design a strategy to
recover the lost functionality.
Preliminaries, Related works and Problem definition: LetG = (V,E) be a simple
undirected connected graph (without self-loops and multiple edges), where V  is
the set of vertices andE is the set of edges. An edge between two verticesvi and
vj  is denoted by (vi,vj). Let n =|V| be the number of vertices and m =|E| be
the number of edges ofG.N(v) is the open neighbourhood of the vertex v∈V ,
consisting  of  all  its  neighbours,  while N[v]  is  the  closed  neighbourhood  of v,
defined asN[v] =N(v)∪{v}. A sequence of distinct verticesP  ={v1,v2,··· ,vp}
is called a path of the graphG if (vi,vi+1)∈E∀i∈{1, 2,··· ,p− 1}. Whenever
both endpoints of a pathv1 andvp are explicitly mentioned, we denote the path
as Pv1vp.  Additionally,  if v1  = vp,  the  sequence  is  called  a  cycle  of  the  graph
G. If G admits a path of length (n− 1), then the path is called a Hamiltonian
path.  Similarly,  if  a  graph  has  a  cycle  of  length n,  then  the  cycle  is  called  a
Hamiltonian  cycle, and the graph is called  Hamiltonian  graph. In other words,
a graph is called  Hamiltonian  if there exists a cycle that passes through each
vertex ofG exactly once. The problem of finding a Hamiltonian cycle in a graph,
or checking whether a given graph is Hamiltonian, is known as the Hamiltonian
cycle problem, which is one of Karp’s 21 NP-complete problems [13]. Given that
a  class  of  graphs  lacks  a  Hamiltonian  path  or  cycle,  there  is  growing  interest
in determining a minimum-length spanning walk of those graphs. A  walk  is a
path  with  some  possible  repeated  vertices.  If  both  endpoints  of  the  walk  are
the same (or different), the walk is termed a closed (or open) walk. A walk is a
spanning walk  ofG if it passes through each vertex of G at least once. A closed
spanning walk of minimum length is termed as  Hamiltonian  walk. The length
of  a  Hamiltonian  walk  of  the  graph G  is  known  as  Hamiltonian  number  and
denoted as h+(G). If h+(G) = n, the graph G is Hamiltonian and vice versa.
n≤h+(G)≤ 2(n−1). It is well known thath+(G) = 2n−2 iffG is a tree [9]. An
open spanning walk ofG is a spanning walk with different endpoints, and we use
the notation h−(G) to denote the length of the minimum open spanning walk
of G.  Finding  the  minimum-length  open  spanning  walk  of  a  graph  is  known
as  the  open  Hamiltonian  walk  problem.  If  the  graph G  is  Hamiltonian,  then
h−(G) = (n− 1). However, the converse is not true.
    The challenge of finding an open spanning walk is closely related to the classic
traveling  salesman  problem  (TSP), in which the objective is to locate a mini-
mum weight Hamiltonian cycle in a given complete weighted graph. Christofides-
Serdyukov [5] [16] proposed a  32-approximation algorithm for TSP if the weight
function satisfies the triangular inequality. After decades, Karlin et al. [12] give
a randomized  32−ϵ approximation algorithm for some ϵ> 10−36. A polynomial
time approximation scheme (PTAS) exists for some special instances of the TSP,
such as for Euclidean TSP [2], [15], planar TSP [1], [10], [14], and bounded genus
TSP [6]. The  multiple  traveling  salesman  problem  [4] is a generalization of the
                                    Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents           3

TSP, where multiple salesmen independently (no restriction to the connectivity)
visit the vertices of the graph. Hoogeveen [11] modified Christofide’s heuristic to
find a minimum weight Hamiltonian path of a given weighted complete graph
when the weights satisfy the triangular inequality. The modified heuristic also
gives a  32 approximation factor, which is still the best-known factor for the prob-
lem. We can apply the modified Christofides heuristic to find an open spanning
walk for an undirected, unweighted, and connected graphG by converting it into
a complete weighted graph. To do this, we assign a weight equal to one to each
existing edge and add all missing edges with a weight equal to the length of the
shortest paths between corresponding vertices.

    We address the open Hamiltonian walk problem from the perspective of a
mobile agent that explores the entire graph G in a minimum number of steps,
starting from an arbitrary vertex. At each step, the agent can move to one of
its neighbouring vertices. Therefore, any minimum open-spanning walk consti-
tutes a feasible solution. Additionally, we can apply the modified Christofide’s
heuristic  [11]  to  obtain  a  32-approximation  algorithm  for  the  problem.  In  this
paper, we formulate the generalized version of the Hamiltonian walk problem,
which we named as k-agent  Hamiltonian  Walk  problem  (k-HWP), where a set
of k  (≥ 1) agents collectively explore the graph. The constraint is that at any
instant  of  time t(≥  0), k  agents  must  lie  on k  distinct  vertices  of G,  so  that
the  subgraph  induced  by  the  vertices  occupied  by  the k  agents  must  be  con-
nected. Initially, the agents can start from any arbitrary vertices that satisfy the
above constraints. In the next step, all agents move synchronously to one of their
neighbouring vertices or choose to remain stationary. Let A ={a1,a2,··· ,ak}
be the set of k  agents. We use vti  to denote the vertex vi  occupied by a agent
ai  at  the t-th  step.  We  denote  the  configuration  at  the t-th  step  byCt,  and
defined by the k-tuple (vt1,vt2,··· ,vtk), where vti̸= vtj,∀i̸= j  and the subgraph
induced by the set of vertices{vt1,vt2,··· ,vtk}⊆V  is connected. For convenience,
we slightly abuse the notationCt  to denote the set{vt1,vt2,··· ,vtk} and, more
generally, any arbitrary configuration. Two configurations,Ct  andCt′, are said
to be  adjacent  if∀i∈{1, 2,··· ,k} either vti  = vt′i   or (vti,vt′i )∈ E. We imag-
ine a graph whose vertices correspond to configurations, where two vertices are
adjacent if the corresponding configurations are adjacent. We refer to the edge
between two adjacent vertices, i.e., configurations, as a transition edge. The ob-
jective of k-HWP is to find a sequence of configurations{C0,C1,··· ,Cl} with a
minimum  length  (i.e., l is minimum) such that each vertex of G appears in at
least one configuration in the sequence, and there is a transition edge between
every two consecutive configurations. In other words, the objective is to find an
open spanning walk of configurations{Ct}lt=0  of minimum length, where each
vertex in this walk is a k-tuple configuration and∪lt=0∪ki=1vti =V . We denote
the length of this open walk by h−k (G). If there are (l + 1) many configurations
in  the  walk,  then h−k (G)  = l.  When k  =  1, h−1 (G)  coincides  with h−(G).  An
open  walk  of  configurations  is  called  a   transition  walk.  Since  we  focus  solely
on the open walk in this paper, we use hk(G), instead of h−k (G), to denote the
length of the minimum open spanning walk of configurations for the graph G
4           Jana et al.

withk agents. The NP-completeness ofk-HWP follows from the fact that when
k = 1, it is equivalent to the Hamiltonian walk problem, which is known to be
NP-complete. We present the formal definition of k-HWP below.

Definition 1(Problem:  k-HWP).  Consider  an  undirected  connected  graph
G and a collection of k  agents. The goal is to find a sequence of configurations
of  minimum  length  such  that  each  successive  pair  in  the  sequence  is  adjacent,
and every vertex in G is included at least once in one of these configurations.

When k  =  2,  any  configuration  represents  an  edge  of G.  Therefore,  we  can
interpret the problem as traversing the graph through its edges.

Definition 2( r-transition edge). The transition edge between two configura-
tionsCt  andCt′  is said to be a r-transition edge ifCt′  has exactly r vertices that
are not inCt.

For  example  of  a r-transition  edge,  let k  =  4,Ct  =  (v1,v2,v3,v4)  andCt′  =
(v5,v2,v4,v6). IfCt  andCt′  are adjacent, then the edge between them is called
a 2-transition edge. The transition edges of k-HWP can be categorized into k
distinct classes based on the value ofr∈{1, 2,··· ,k}. We disregard 0-transition
edges,  which  indicate  that  agents  either  remain  stationary  or  rearrange  their
positions without visiting new vertices. Since our objective is to identify a tran-
sition  walk  of  minimum  length,  we  consistently  strive  to  minimize  the  num-
ber of configurations encountered during any transition walk. For example, let
Ct = (v1,v2,v3,v4),Ct′  = (v2,v4,v3,v1) andCt′′  = (v5,v6,v7,v8). Suppose that
a  transition  walk  includes  the  configurationCt,  followed  byCt′,  and  thenCt′′.
The  transition  edge  betweenCt  andCt′  is  0-transition  edge.  We  can  modify
the  walk  by  removing Ct′  and  replacingCt′′  withCt′′′  =  (v8,v5,v7,v6).  The
modification  is  valid  because  the  configurationsCt′,Ct′′  are  adjacent,  implies
(v1,v8), (v2,v5), (v3,v7), (v4,v6) all belonging toE, impliesCt,Ct′′′ are adjacent.
By making this change, we eliminate the 0-transition edge.


1.1    Our Contribution

In this paper, our contributions are the following:

 –  We define k-agents Hamiltonian walk problem (k-HWP).
 –  For the tree, we propose an optimal algorithm when k≤ 3. For any value of
    k, we present an optimal algorithm for the restricted version of the problem
    on tree, where we only allow 1-transition edges (Theorem 3).
 –  We give a (3−   121)-approximation algorithm on arbitrary graphs for k = 2
    (Theorem 4).
 –  We extend the problem definition to hypergraphs and propose a 2(1 + lnk)-
    approximation algorithm for k-uniform hypergraphs (Theorem 5). This al-
    gorithm is further developed into an approximation algorithm for k-HWP,
    when k =O(1) (Theorem 6).
                                    Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents           5

2    Algorithms for Tree

Since the k-HWP problem is NP-hard for general graphs, our goal is to explore
specific graph classes where optimal solutions can be achieved. This section ex-
aminesk-HWP problem on acyclic graphs and presents results for a constrained
version of the problem. First, we describe an optimal strategy (1-HWP-For-
Tree) to solve 1-HWP for tree. This serves as a foundation for understanding
the generalized strategy (for arbitrary values ofk), which we discuss later in the
section. A vertex is called leaf  (or pendant) if it has degree one. The diameter
of the graph G, denoted diam(G), is the length of the longest path.
Description of the Algorithm (1-HWP-For-Tree): Let P∗  = Pv∗1v∗2  be a
longest path of the treeG. Then, bothv∗1 andv∗2 must be leaves ofG. The agent
starts  the  traversal  from v∗1  and  aims  to  eventually  reach v∗2  while  traversing
all the vertices. If multiple unexplored vertices are available, it prioritizes those
not  located  on P∗.  Whenever  all  adjacent  vertices  are  explored,  it  backtracks
to its parent vertex. A parent vertex of v is the vertex from which the vertex v
is explored for the first time. The pseudocode of the Algorithm is provided in
Algorithm 1. We analyze the algorithm below.


Algorithm 1 1-HWP-For-Tree
 1:Find the longest path of the graph    G, say P∗ = Pv∗1v∗2 .
 2:  for every v in V  do
 3:       explored(v) = FALSE and parent(v) = NULL
 4:  end for
 5:Start from the vertex    v∗1  and set v = v∗1; explored(v) = TRUE
 6:  while v̸= v∗2 do
 7:      if∃ a v′∈ N(v) with explored(v′) = FALSE and v′  /∈ P∗ then
 8:          Move to the vertex    v′
 9:            explored(v′) = TRUE;  parent(v′) = v;  v = v′
10:      else if∃ a v′∈ N(v) with explored(v′) = FALSE and v′∈ P∗ then
11:        Move to the vertex      v′
12:            explored(v′) = TRUE;  parent(v′) = v;  v = v′
13:      else
14:        Move to      parent(v) and set v = parent(v)
15:      end if
16:  end while



Lemma 1.  The walk returned by 1-HWP-For-Tree is a spanning walk of G
with  length  2(n− 1)−diam(G),  where diam(G)  is  the  diameter  and n  is  the
number of vertices of G.

Proof.  Steps (6 - 14) from the pseudocode of Algorithm 1 justify that the agent
lying on an explored vertexv backtracks (move to the parent) only when it finds
all its neighbouring vertices explored. However, an agent lying onP∗ never back-
tracks, as it always finds an unexlored neighbour lying on P∗. So, the existence
6           Jana et al.

of  unexplored  vertex  (/∈ P∗)  means  that  the  agent  backtracks  despite  having
an unexplored neighbour, which is a contradiction. Additionally, all the vertices
on P∗ must be explored as there is a unique way to reach v∗2  from v∗1, which is
through P∗.
    Let (x,y) be an arbitrary edge in E. Without loss of generality, we assume
thatx is the parent ofy. If (x,y)∈P∗, the agent never moves back tox fromy,
as it must encounter an unexplored neighbour vertex z∈P∗∩N(y) and moves
to it (steps 10-11). If (x,y) /∈P∗, theny also does not lie inP∗. Here, when the
agent  reaches y,  it  returns  to x(parent(y))  after  confirming  that  every  vertex
in N(y)  has  been  explored  (steps  13-14).  Consequently,  all  the  edges  that  do
not  belong  to P∗  are  traversed  twice  in  the  walk  produced  by  the  algorithm.
Therefore, the length of the walk is 2(n− 1)−diam(G), as the tree has (n− 1)
edges and the number of edges in the longest path equals the diameter of the
tree.                                ⊓⊔

Remark 1.  Algorithm 1 runs polynomially. This is because we can find the di-
ameter  of  the  graph  in  linear  time  (  in  terms  of n).  All  other  operations  per
transition also take polynomial time, since all checks and assign operations for
a vertex are done in at most|N(v)|≤∆ time, where ∆ is the maximum degree
of the tree G. So the algorithm needs in total O(n) +PO(∆) time, where the
summation is over number of steps required by the algorithm, which is at most
2n. Hence the overall time complexity of the algorithm is O(n·∆) time.

Lemma 2.  For a tree G with n vertices, h1(G)≥ 2(n− 1)−diam(G).

Proof.  Any open spanning walk must contain each edge of the tree at least once.
Consider an optimal spanning walkW , which starts from the vertexvi and ends
atvj. Since the graph is a tree, there is always a unique path P  betweenvi and
vj. Let (x,y)∈E be an edge that does not belong toP . We will prove that (x,y)
must appear twice in this walk. Then W  is the union of either (i) the sub-walk
vi to x with no internal y, then x to y, and finally the sub-walk y to vj, or (ii)
the sub-walk vi  to y  with no internal x, then y  to x, and then the sub-walk x
to vj. For the first case, the edge (x,y) is encountered for the first time when
it traverses from x to y. Then again when traverses from y to vj, as there is an
unique path between y and vj  which contains x. Similarly, we can prove for the
second case. However, any edge lying onP  may not meet either of the above two
conditions. So, the length of the walk W  islen(W ) =h1(G)≥ (total number of
edges) + (number of edges not in P )≥ (n− 1) + (n− 1−diam(G)), since the
length of P  is at most diam(G).                    ⊓⊔

    Hence we have an algorithm (1-HWP-For-Tree) for 1-HWP on tree, which
returned a spanning walk that matches with the lower bound ofh1(G). Therefore,
combining Lemma 1, 2 and Remark 1, we can state the following theorem.

Theorem 1.  Algorithm  1-HWP-For-Tree  provides  an  optimal  solution  for
1-HWP in polynomial time, when the input graph G is a tree.
                                    Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents           7

Using the above strategy, we now design an algorithm for a restricted version of
k-HWP on trees, where the restriction is on the type of transition edges allowed
between two configurations. We begin with the following structural property.

Theorem 2.  If G  is a  tree  and the edge between  two configurationsCt  andCt′
in the k-HWP is an r-transition edge, then r≤⌊k2⌋, where k≥ 2.

Proof.  We first prove that there must exist a vertex v inCt∩Ct′. Suppose, on
the contrary, thatCt∩Ct′ =∅. In such a scenario, there exist two distinct paths
between the vertices vti  and vtj, where vti  and vtj  are the positions of the agents
ai  and aj, respectively, in the configurationCt. Since the induced graph G[Ct]
made by the vertices ofCt  is connected, there exists a path between vti  and vtj
that entirely  lies in G[Ct]. An  alternative path proceeds  via the edge  (vti,vt′i ),
followed  by a  path within G[Ct′] from vt′i   to vt′j , and  concludes with the  edge
(vt′j ,vtj). The existence of two such distinct paths contradicts the fact that there
is always a unique path between two vertices in a tree.
    Now  consider  a  vertex vt′i ∈Ct′\Ct.  We  claim  that vti ∈Ct′.  Otherwise,
there  would  exist  two  paths  between  some v ∈Ct∩Ct′  and vt′i :  one  passing
through vti  and the other does not, which is again a contradiction. Hence, for
everyvt′i ∈Ct′\Ct, the correspondingvti∈Ct∩Ct′. In other words, for each new
vertex of the current configuration (Ct′), we always have a unique vertex that is
part of both the current and previous configuration (Ct). Thus the proof.  ⊓⊔

    The  above  result  implies  that  when k≤  3,  all  transition  edges  are  neces-
sarily 1-transition edges. For larger values of k, between the movements of one
configuration to the other, the agents might encounterk/2 new vertices. To sim-
plify the transition structure and enable the design of an optimal algorithm, we
consider a restricted version of k-HWP, where each transition edge must be a
1-transition edge, regardless of the number of agents (k). We refer to this prob-
lem  as k-agents  restricted  Hamiltonian  walk  problem  (k-RHWP).  We  present
a polynomial-time algorithm, k-RHWP-For-Tree, that computes an optimal
solution to the k-RHWP on trees. The optimal length of the k-RHWP on G is
denoted by hrk(G). Note that hr2(G) =h2(G) and hr3(G) =h3(G). We introduce
subsequent definitions (Definition 3, 4 ), which are limited to the tree.

Definition 3(Problem: k-RHWP). Consider an undirected connected graph
G  along  with  a  collection  of k  agents.  The  objective  is  to  find  a  sequence  of
configurations of minimum length such that between every two consecutive con-
figurations in the sequence there is a 1-transition edge, and every vertex of G is
included at least once in one of these configurations.

Definition 4(Explored  edge  or  vertex).    LetCt  andCt′  be  two  adjacent
configurations  in  a  transition  walk  of k-RHWP;  then  there  exists  exactly  one
vertex vt′i ∈Ct′\Ct.  We  say  that  the  edge (vti,vt′i )  is  explored  (or  encountered)
by the transition fromCt  toCt′  or the vertex vt′i   is explored (or encountered).
8           Jana et al.

Next, we describe the algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree for solving k-RHWP on
trees. We designate one of the agents as the head, who explores the graph. All
other agents either follow the head or remain stationary to maintain connectivity.
Description of the Algorithm (k-RHWP-For-Tree): Let P∗  = Pv∗1v∗2  be
a  longest  path  of G.  All  vertices  are  initially  unexplored.  Agents  are  initially
deployed using the strategy 1-HWP-For-Tree. The agent ai is placed at the
vertexv0i , thei-th explored vertex by 1-HWP-For-Tree. So, the initial config-
urationC0 equals (v01,v02,··· ,v0k), wherev01 =v∗1. We refer to the verticesv0k and
v01  as the head  (vH) and the tail  (vT ) of the current configuration, respectively.
Additionally, we apply the terms head and tail to agents at vH  and vT , respec-
tively.  The  head  takes  priority  in  exploring  the  graph.  If  the  head  encounters
a situation where it finds all its neighbours as explored, it locates the nearest
occupied vertex that has at least one unexplored neighbour. This vertex then
becomes the new head, while the previous head is designated as the new tail. If
the head has multiple unexplored neighbours, it selects the vertex v, which does
not lie on P∗, as its next target of movement and sets parent(v) = vH. If the
neighbours of all the occupied vertices (including head) in the current configu-
ration are explored, the agent ai closest toP∗ becomes the new head, while the
previous head becomes the new tail. In this case, agent ai decides its target as
parent(v′), where v′ is the current position of ai. Once the head sets its target
for the next movement, all the agents lying on the path between head and tail,
including the tail, will move simultaneously in the direction of the head, while
all other agents remain stationary. If the tail is not a leaf vertex of the induced
graph G′, which is formed by all occupied vertices, then moving the tail would
disconnectG′. In such a case, we assign the tail to one of the leaf vertices of G′,
excluding both the head and the vertex nearest to P∗, if possible. Once all the
agents between vH  and vT  have moved to their designated targets, we update
the head and tail accordingly. Whenever the vertex v∗2  becomes the head, the
algorithm terminates. The pseudocode is mentioned in Algorithm 2.
Execution Example of the Algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree Consider the
graph as depicted in Fig. 1. The vertex set is V  ={v1,v2,··· ,v18}. Let P∗ =
Pv1v18. The solution returned by 1-HWP-For-Tree is the walkW1 ={v1,v2,v3,
v4,v5,v6,v7,v6,v8,v9,v8,v6,v5,v10,v11,v12, v13,v12,v14,v12,v11,v10,v5,v15,v16,
v17,v18}. Now, we investigate the problem 4-RHWP and the solution returned by
the algorithmk-RHWP-For-Tree. The initial configuration isC0 = (v1,v2,v3,
v4), since these are the four vertices explored byW1.v4 is termed head andv1 is
termed tail. In the next step, the head (v4) moves tov5 and all the other agents
follow  the  head.  After  the  movement,C1  =  (v2,v3,v4,v5).  Similarly,  we  have
C2 = (v6,v5,v4,v3) andC3 = (v7,v6,v5,v4). AtC3, the current head (v7) does not
have an unexplored neighbour. The head is transferred tov6, which is the nearest
occupied vertex with at least one unexplored neighbour. In addition, the previous
headv7 becomes the new tail. Now, the head sets the target tov8. All agents be-
tween head and tail, which is in this case tail only, follow the head, that is, move
tov6. However, the other two agents remain stationary. After the movement, the
configuration isC4 = (v6,v8,v5,v4), wherev8 is the head andv6 is the tail. Cur-
                                     Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents           9

rently, the tail v6 is the non-leaf vertex of the induced graph G′ formed by the
set of occupied vertex{v6,v8,v5,v4}. In this scenario, the tail is transferred to
v4, which is the only leaf vertex (excluding the headv8). After this, all agents set
their target and reach the configurationC5 ={v8,v9,v6,v5}. Similarly, we can
haveC6  ={v6,v8,v5,v10};C7  ={v5,v6,v10,v11};C8  ={v10,v5,v11,v12};C9  =
{v11,v10,v12,v13};C10 ={v11,v10,v14,v12}. In this situation, the head is at v14,
the  tail  is  at v12,  and  there  is  no  occupied  vertex  with  an  unexplored  neigh-
bour.v10, the nearest vertex to P∗ becomes the new head and sets its target as
parent(v10 =v5. We can similarly compute the other configurations, which are
C11  ={v10,v5,v12,v11};C12  ={v5,v15,v11,v10};C13  ={v15,v16,v10,v5};C14  =
{v16,v17,v5,v15};C15 ={v17,v18,v15,v16}. In the last transition, the vertex v18
is  encountered,  and  so  the  algorithm  terminates.  The  length  of  the  transition
walk is 15.



































Fig. 1: Illustrating a stepwise execution of k-RHWP-For-Tree with P∗ = Pv1v18 and k = 4. Theblue
nodes represent the occupied vertices whileHandTindicate the head and tail, respectively.      Ci is the
configuration at i-th step. Solid single arrows represent direct transitions between configurations;
solid double arrows indicate intermediate configurations are omitted; dotted arrows represent the
transposition of head and tail within a configuration


Analysis of the Algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree: We analyze the algorithm
k-RHWP-For-Tree in the following after introducing some definitions, which
are limited for the case of tree.

Definition 5.  For a fixed path P  and set of k  agents, we define dkP (e) for each
edgee = (u,v)∈E as follows:dkP (e) = 0,∀e∈P . For all the other edgese /∈P ,
let u  be  the  vertex  closer  to P  than v  and  let TP (e)  be  the  subtree  rooted  at v
10         Jana et al.

after deleting e from G. If the height of the tree TP (e) is at most (k− 2), we set
dkP (e) = 0  otherwise dkP (e) = 1.  In  other  words, dkP (e) = 1,  if∃z∈ TP (e)  such
that the distance between u and z  is at least k.
    For example, in Fig. 1, consider the path P  = Pv1v18  and k  = 4. d4P (e′  =
(v5,v10)) = 1, as the height of TP (e) rooted at v10 is 3> (k− 2). For all other
edges e, d4P (e) = 0. dkP (e) = 0 indicates that the edge e is encountered exactly
once, while dkP (e) = 1 means that it is encountered more than once. The edge
(v5,v10) is encountered twice by our algorithm; first during the transition from
C5 toC6 and again during the transition fromC10 toC11.

Definition 6.  LetSol be an algorithm fork-RHWP. We define the pathPSol as
the path between the vertices xSol  and ySol, where ySol  is the last vertex encoun-
tered or explored by the Sol, and xSol  is the vertex in the initial configuration of
Sol that is farthest from ySol.

Lemma 3.  The  walk  of  configurations  returned  by  the  algorithm k-RHWP-
For-Tree  is  a  spanning  walk  of G  of  length tALG  = (n−k) +Pe∈EdkP∗(e),
where P∗  is the longest path of G between the vertices v∗1  and v∗2  selected by the
algorithm.

Proof.  The initial deployment of the agents encountered exactlyk vertices, which
is assured by the correctness of Algorithm 1-HWP-For-Tree. Similar to Algo-
rithm 1-HWP-For-Tree, we only move backward to the parent vertex when
all the neighbours of thek-agents are explored, which confirms that each vertex
must be in either the initial configuration or encountered by some subsequent
configuration. To prove the second part of the lemma, it is sufficient to prove that
any edge withdkP∗(e) = 0 encountered exactly once and an edge withdkP∗(e) = 1
encountered exactly twice. First, we will prove that any edge e = (u,v) lies on
P∗ encountered exactly once, where v is nearer to v∗2  than u. Let v be explored
for the first time by the configurationCt. Since an agent (head) lies at u moves
tov∈P∗ only when all other neighbours ofu are already explored. As the final
target isv∗2 andv is nearer tov∗2 thanu, no agent being a head ever moves back
to u  from v.  Therefore,  the  edge e  is  encountered  exactly  once.  Now,  we  will
prove that any edge e = (u,v) /∈ P∗  can be encountered at most twice by the
algorithm. The edge e is encountered when we reach a configuration with the
head as u, and then it sets its next target for the movement as v. After this,
if the algorithm reaches a configuration with the head as v  and all the vertex
in the configuration are explored, then at the next configuration, it encountered
e again by moving the agent lie at v  to u, which is the parent(u). Afterward,
we can not have a configuration with an agent lying on u as the head and v as
its next target, as v  has already been explored. So, the algorithm counters an
edge at most twice. Next we show that, an edgee, withdkP∗(e) = 0, encountered
exactly once. We will discuss the extreme case. A similar argument will follow
for the other case. Let us consider an edge e = (x,y) such that the height of
the  sub-tree TP (e)  rooted  at y  is  exactly  (k− 2).  Let e  be  first  encountered
by the configurationCt. All the later configurations that encountered the other
                                        Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         11

Algorithm 2 k-RHWP-For-Tree
     /* Initial deployment of the agents  */
 1:Find the longest path of the tree, say the path is    P∗ with the endpoints v∗1  and v∗2
 2:  for every v∈ V  do
 3:       explored(v)← FALSE
 4:  end for
 5:Deploy the agent    a1 at v∗1
 6:Use   1-HWP-For-Tree to explore exactly k vertices starting from v∗1, let the vertex
     v0i  is the i-th explored vertex.
 7:Deploy the agent    ai at the vertex v0i , 2≤ i≤ k
 8:Set    vH← v0k; vT← v0i  = v∗1
     /* Transition Part */
 9:  while vH̸= v∗2 do
10:   Let      V′⊆ V  be the set of currently occupied vertices by the k agents, and let
     G′ be the corresponding induced subgraph of G
     /* Check whether there exists a vertex v∈ V′ with one unexplored neighbour */
11:      if (∃ v′∈ N(vH) with explored(v′) = FALSE) or ((∀ v′∈ N(vH), explored(v′)
     = TRUE) and (∃ a vertex in G′  other than vH  with one unexplored neighbour))
     then
12:           if  ∄v′∈ N(vH) with explored(v′) = FALSE then
13:             Find  the  vertex      v  nearest  to  vH  in  G′  with  at  least  one  unexplored
     neighbour
14:                 vT← vH;  vH← v
15:           end if
16:           if∃ v′∈ N(vH) with explored(v) = FALSE and v′  /∈ P∗ then
17:             The agent, that lie on      vH, set its target vtgtH   = v′
18:           else                    ▷∃ v′∈ N(vH) with explored(v) = FALSE and v′∈ P∗
19:             The agent, that lie on      vH, set its target vtgtH   = v′
20:           end if
21:      else                                         ▷ all the neighbours of v are explored,∀v∈ V′
22:        Find the vertex      v∈ V′ which is nearest to P∗
23:           if  v̸= vH then
24:                 vT← vH;  vH← v
25:           end if
26:        The agent, that lie on      vH, set its target vtgtH   = parent(vH)
27:      end if
28:   The agent, that lie on      vH, moves to the target vertex vtgtH
29:      if  vT  is not a leaf vertex of G′ then                ▷ change the tail to a leaf in G′
30:        Find the set of leaves      L′ in G′ and the vertex u′∈ L′ that is nearest to P∗
31:           if  there exists a vertex u′′∈ L′ other than u′ then
32:                 vT← u′′
33:           else
34:                 vT← u′
35:           end if
36:      end if
37:   Let      P  ={vH = v1, v2,··· , vp = vT} be the path between vH  and vT
     /* All the agents on the path P  follow the head */
38:   The agent lie on      vi sets its target vtgti    = vi−1(∀i : 2≤ i≤ p) and all the other
     agents not lying on P  remain stationary
39:   All the agents move to their respective targets in one step
40:       explored(vtgtH  ) = TRUE, vH← vtgtH  , vT← vp−1
41:  end while
12         Jana et al.

vertices ofTP (e) must contain the edgee, as we never make the vertexx (which
is nearest to P∗ among all the occupied vertices) as the tail (vT ) of those con-
figurations  (Step  33-34).  Let’s  consider  an  example  as  referred  in  Fig.  3.  Let
k  =  4,Ct  =  (z,x,y4,y6)  be  the t-th  configuration  returned  by  the  Algorithm
k-HWP-For-Tree, where vH  = y6,vT  = z. Then, if we apply the algorithm
we  encountered e  =  (x,y)  at  the  next  configurationCt+1  =  (z,y,x,y4)  with
vH  = y,vT  = y4.  The  subsequent  configurations  areCt+2  =  (z,y1,y,x)  with
vH  = y1,vT  = x;Ct+3 = (z,y,y2,x) with vH  = y2,vT  = y;Ct+4 = (x,y2,y5,y)
with vH  = y5,vT  = x;Ct+5  = (x,y3,y2,y) with vH  = y2,vT  = x. This shows
that  all  the  configurations  contain  the  edge e(x,y).  In  the  next  configuration
vH  changes  to x  and vT  changes  to y3  and  moves  to  the  next  configuration
Ct+6  =  (z,y2,y,x)  with vH  = z,vT  = y2.  Thus  the  lemma  follows,  i.e.,  the
length of the walk is (n− 1)− (k− 1)−Pe∈P∗dkP∗(e), (n− 1) referred as the
number edges to be encountered, (k−1) is subtracted as those many are covered
in the initial configuration and the last part say that those edges are encountered
twice.                                ⊓⊔














                                                     Fig. 3: v∗1  and v∗2  are the endpoints of one of
      Fig. 2: Pxy is one of the longest paths.       the longest paths of the tree.



Lemma 4.  The  time  needed  for  the  Algorithm  k-RHWP-For-Tree  is O(n·
k·∆),  where k  is  the  number  of  agents, n  is  the  number  of  vertices,  and ∆  is
the maximum degree of the tree G.

Proof.  The diameter of a tree can be computed in O(n) time using the depth-
first  search  (DFS)  twice,  which  is  a  very  standard  process.  First,  perform  a
DFS from an arbitrary node (considered the root) to identify the node that is
furthest from it. Then, perform a second DFS starting from that furthest node.
The  maximum  distance  discovered  in  this  second  traversal  is  the  diameter  of
the tree. From Remark 1, the initial deployment can also be completed in O(n)
time. Thereafter, at each step, we need to identify an occupied vertex that has at
least one unoccupied neighbour. For each such vertexv, we can check whether it
has any unexplored neighbours—or determine that all its neighbours are already
explored—in O(∆) time, where ∆ is the maximum degree of the graph. In the
worst case, none of the occupied vertices have unexplored neighbours. In that
case,  we  have  to  check  for  all  the  occupied  vertices  starting  from  the  head,
which requires O(k∆) time, as there are k many occupied vertices in each step
(configuration). In addition, if the tail is not located at the the leaf of G′, the
                                   Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         13

induced subgraph made by the occupied vertices, then we have to transfer the
tail. The construction of G′ and the execution of the transfer (if needed) again
takeO(k) time. Therefore, each transition from one configuration to the next can
be completed in at mostO(k∆) time. From Lemma 3, the algorithm terminates
after at most (n−k) +Pe∈EdkP∗(e)≤ (n−k) + (n−diam(G))< 2n steps. The
total time complexity of the algorithm is O(n·k·∆).           ⊓⊔

Lemma 5.  Let tOpt  be  the  length  of  an  open  spanning  walk  of  configurations
with k  agents,  returned  by  an  optimal  algorithm Opt.  Then tOpt≥  (n−k) +
P
  e∈EdkPOpt(e).

Proof.  Any initial configuration ofk-HWP covers exactly (k− 1) many edges of
G. So, there are exactly (n−1−(k−1)) = (n−k) unexplored edges, which need to
be explored sequentially and require at least (n−k) steps. Consider all the edges
e with dkPOpt(e) = 1. To prove the lemma, it is sufficient to prove that all such
edgese must be encountered at least twice by the algorithmOpt. Lete = (u,v),
where u is the vertex nearer to POpt  than v. By Definition 5, there must exist
a  leaf z  such  that  the  distance  between u  and z  is  at  least k.  Let  the  edge e
be encountered in some configuration (Ct) when an agent lies at u and moves
to v. Let w  be the vertex adjacent to z, and letCt′  be the configuration that
encountered the edge (w,z) for the first time. Then t′ >t must hold. AfterCt′,
the edgee is again encountered, as the algorithmOpt terminates after exploring
the vertex ySol. Thus, it must cross the edge e while moving to ySol afterCt′.
    For example, consider Fig. 2. LetPOpt =Pxy andk = 3. We havedkPOpt(e) =
1. Let, the edgese and (u,v) encountered for the first time by the configurations
Ct andCt′, respectively. Then the inequalityt′≥t+2 must hold andCt′ consists
of the vertices{v,w,z}. The edge e is encountered again afterCt′, as the last
encountered vertex is y.                        ⊓⊔

Lemma 6.  For  a  tree G, hrk(G)≥  (n−k) +Pe∈EdkP∗(e),  where P∗  is  the
longest  paths  of  the  tree G  joining  two  vertices v∗1  and v∗2,  which  is  selected  by
the Algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree.

Proof.  Let Opt  be  the  optimal  algorithm  and Pxy  be  the  path  between  the
vertices x  and y,  where x  is  the  last  explored  vertex,  and x  is  the  vertex  in
the initial configuration, which is farthest from y. Then hrk(G) = tOpt≥ (n−
k) +Pe∈EdkPxy(e), by Lemma 5. It is sufficient to prove that Pe∈EdkPxy(e)−
P
  e∈EdkP∗(e)≥ 0. Since G is a tree, there must exist exactly one sub-path that
intersects bothPxy andP∗, sayPuv. We assume thatlen(P )−(k−1)≥ 0,∀P∈
{Pxu,Pv∗1u,Pvy,Pvv∗2}. We set the corresponding value as zero if any of them is
negative. All edges that lie on the pathPxu must have the correspondingdkPxy(.)
value is zero. However, the associated dkP∗(.) may not be zero. Although there
exist exactlylen(Pxu)−(k−1) number of edges on the pathPxu with associated
dkP∗(.) value as one, as these are the edgese for which the height of the rooted tree
TPOPT (e) is more than (k− 2). On the other hand, all the edges that lie on the
pathPv∗1u must have correspondingdkP∗(.) value is zero, but there exists an exact
14         Jana et al.

len(Pv∗1u)−(k−1) number of edges on the pathPv∗1u with associateddkPxy(.) value
as one. Similar arguments are also followed when considering the path Pvy  and
Pvv∗2 . ThusPe∈EdkPOPT (e)−Pe∈EdkP∗(e) = (len(Pv∗1u)− (k− 1))− (len(Pxu−
(k−1))+(len(Pvv∗2 )−(k−1))−(len(Pvy)−(k−1)) =len(Pv∗1v∗2 )−len(Pxy)≥ 0,
as P∗ =Pv∗1v∗2  is the longest path among all the paths of G.        ⊓⊔

    The above analysis shows that the algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree returns a
spanning walk ofG whose length matches the lower bound of hrk(G). Therefore,
combining Lemmas 3, 4, 5, and 6, we establish the following theorem.

Theorem 3.  Algorithm k-RHWP-For-Tree provides an optimal solution for
k-RHWP in polynomial time, when the input graph G is a tree.

3    Algorithms for Arbitrary Graph in Case of k=2

Here,  we  present  an  approximation  algorithm  for  the  2-HWP  on  an  arbitrary
graphG. We start by introducing a simple algorithm that achieves an asymptotic
approximation factor of 3, using the relationship between h1(G) and h2(G).

Lemma 7. h1(G)≤ 2·h2(G) + 1.

Proof.  LetW2 ={(u1,u2), (u3,u4),··· , (u2p+1,u2p+2)} be an optimal spanning
walk of configuration with two agents. Then p = h2(G). Also by the definition
of adjacent configurations,(u2i+1,u2i+2∈ E,∀i : 0≤ i≤ p; u2i+1  = u2i+3  or
(u2i+1,u2i+3)∈ E,∀i : 0≤ i≤ p− 1; u2i+2 = u2i+4  or (u2i+2,u2i+4)∈ E,∀i :
0≤ i≤ p− 1. Hence, we can convert W2  to a spanning walk W1  of G, where
W1  ={u1,u2,u4,u3,u5,u6,u8,u7,···}.  The  length  of W1  is  at  most  2p + 1.
Therefore, h1(G)≤ 2p + 1≤ 2h2(G) + 1.                ⊓⊔

The Approximation Algorithm for 2-HWP: Let W1 ={v1,v2,··· ,vl+1}
be  a  spanning  walk  of  configurations  with  one  agent  using  some  known β-
approximation  algorithm  for  the  open  Hamiltonian  walk  problem.  Then l ≤
β·h1(G). The walk W1  can be converted to a spanning walk of configurations
W2  with two agents, where W2  ={(v1,v2), (v2,v3),··· , (vl,vl+1)}. The length
of the walk W2 is (l− 1)≤β·h1(G)− 1≤ 2β·h2(G) + (β− 1), by Lemma 7.
The best known approximation factor for the Hamiltonian walk problem is 3/2
by Hoogeveen [11]. Hence, we have a solution of size at most (3h2(G) + 1).
    Now, we want to find out if there is an approximation algorithm for 2-HWP
that has an approximation factor less than 3. Theorem 4 conclusively confirms
the possibility. The proposed algorithm uses two subroutines. One is modified
Christofide’s  heuristic [11] to find the minimum-weight Hamiltonian path
in a complete weighted graph. The other is an approximation algorithm for the
maximum weighted r-set packing problem  (maxrSPP ) [18], where we are given
a collection of weighted sets, each of which contains at most r elements from a
fixed universe of finite elements. The goal is to find a sub-collection of pairwise
disjoint sets with the maximum total weight.
                                    Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         15

Overview  of  the  Improved  Algorithm  for  2-HWP:  First,  we  create  a
weighted set-packing instance from the given unweighted graph G (Section 3.1).
Then, we apply an approximation algorithm of the set-packing problem to get
a  solution,  and  from  that  solution,  we  construct  a  tree Tr(G)  that  spans  all
the vertices of V  (Section 3.2). Next, we find an open Hamiltonian walk in the
tree Tr(G), which gives us the required solution (Section 3.3). The proofs of all
lemmas are excluded due to page limits.


3.1    Creating a set-packing instance from G

From a given instance of 2-HWP, we first create an instance of max6SPP , de-
noted asISP (G). The motivation behind the construction is to select all possible
cases from which we can get a 2-transition edge. These transitions may arise from
a cycle of length four (C4) or a grid of size 2× 3 or any combination of the two.
Finding  such  a  disjoint  collection  of  sets  is  preferable,  as  it  reduces  repeated
visits to certain vertices. This can be achieved by applying the set-packing al-
gorithm.  However,  it  is  possible  that  two C4’s  intersect  at  a  single  vertex  (as
shown in Fig. 4). In such cases, all vertices of two C4’s can be traversed using 4
configurations. So, selecting only disjoint sets does not fully satisfy our objective.
We define several types of packing sets to adapt such subgraphs in our solution.
    We  construct  four  types  of  weighted  sets:  two  corresponding  to  each  4-
length  cycle C  = {v1,v2,v3,v4},  and  two  corresponding  to  each  2× 3  grid
D ={v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6} in G. Note that G may not contain any C4. In that
case, we have a simpler algorithm with a better approximation factor, which is
discussed at the end of the section (Theorem 2). However, our main focus is the
arbitrary case where the graph may be dense and contains many C4’s.

 –  (Type-I) A set C11 =C with weight four.
 –  (Type-II)  Four  sets,  each  of  the  form Ci2  = C\{vi}∪{uiC}  with  weight
    three for 1≤i≤ 4, where uiC  is a dummy variable corresponding to vi, not
    belonging to V  and not previously used in the construction process.
 –  (Type-III) A set D ={v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6} with weight six.
 –  (Type-IV) For each setD of Type-III, we create another six sets, each of the
    form D\{vi}∪{wiD} with weight five for 1≤i≤ 6, where wiD is a dummy
    variable corresponding to vi, not belonging to V  and not previously used.

We  call  all  these  sets  the  packing  set.  The  weights  are  assigned  according  to
how  many  vertices  a  packing  set  contains  from  the  vertex  set V .  Note  that
{v1,v2,v3,v4} being a cycle of length four, between the configurations (v1,v2)
and (v4,v3), there is a transition edge. Similarly, if{v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6} is a grid
of size 2× 3, there must be two transition edges between (v1,v2) and (v4,v3),
and between the configurations (v4,v3) and (v5,v6).  cycles  of  length  four.  For  each  such  cycle,  we  create
G  can  have  at  most  n4
one Type-I packing set and four Type-II packing sets. Furthermore, G has at grids of size 2× 3. For each such grid, we make one Type-III packing
most n6
set and six Type-IV packing sets. Thus, for a given graph G, we create at most
16         Jana et al.















Fig. 4: (A) A Type-I set{1, 2, 3, 4}, (B) A Type-I set{1, 2, 3, 4} and a Type-II set{u, 5, 6, 7}, where
u is a dummy variable of the vertex 3, (C) A Type-III set{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, (D) A Type-I set{2, 7, 8, 9}
and a Type-IV set{1, v, 3, 4, 5, 6}, where v  is the dummy variable of the vertex 2. These packing
sets are used to accommodate the above-mentioned subgraphs in our solution.

5· n+7· n =O(n6) sets, where each set is of size at most six and the universal
    4        6
set of the procedure is V∪ (∪C∈G∪4i=1uiC)∪ (∪D∈G∪6j=1wjD), where C  is a 4
length cycle and D is a 2× 3 grid in G. All uiC  and wjD (∀i,j) are distinct.
    maxkSPP  is NP-hard and since the introduction of the set packing prob-
lem, a significant research has been conducted in the past few decades for the
weighted, unweighted, and online cases [1], [3], [8], [17], [18]. The best known
polynomial-time approximation algorithm of the weighted k-set packing prob-
lem is given by Thiery and Ward [18], achieving a factor slightly less than    2k+1,
which asymptotically approaches     42k+1  ask grows. We definemax6(I) to repre-
sent the problem max6SPP  for the instanceI. We denote the optimal value of
max6(ISP (G)) by w(OPTSP (G)). Then the following lemma holds:

Lemma 8. h2(G)≥ (n− w(OPTSP (G))2   − 1).

Proof.  LetW∗ be the optimal open spanning walk for the 2-HWP of graph G.
Every transition edge in this walk must be a 1-transition edge or a 2-transition
edge. Based onW∗, we now construct an instanceISP (W∗) ofmax6SPP  as fol-
lows:  for  each  2-transition  edge  between  (v1,v2)  and  (v4,v3),  we  always  have
a  cycle C  = {v1,v2,v3,v4}.  For  each  such  cycle C,  we  create  a  Type-I  set
{v1,v2,v3,v4} with weight four, and four additional Type-II sets{u1C,v2,v3,v4},
{v1,u2C,v3,v4},{v1,v2,u3C,v4},{v1,v2,v3,u4C}, each with weight three. For each
two consecutive 2-transition edges between (v1,v2), (v4,v3) and (v5,v6), we cre-
ate  a  Type-III  set D  = {v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6}  with  weight  six,  along  with  six
Type-IV sets of the form D\{vi}∪{wiD} (1≤ i≤ 6), each with weight five.
It  is  easy  to  observe  that, ISP (W∗) ⊆ ISP (G).  So,  the  optimal  solution  of
max6(ISP (W∗)) must be a feasible solution of max6(ISP (G)). Therefore,

                            w(OPTSP (G))≥w(OPTSP (W∗))                               (1)

where w(OPTSP (W∗)) is the optimal solution of max6(ISP (W∗)).
    The above construction shows that each of Type-I set (weight four) and Type-
II set (weight three) requires two configurations, while each of Type-III (weight
six) and Type-IV (weight five) requires three. Thus, the procedure uses at most a
                                   Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         17

weight of two and at least 3/2 per configuration. Therefore, the following holds:


                    w(OPTSP (W∗))
                             2    ≤|W∗1|≤ 2·w(OPTSP (W∗))3                                   (2)


whereW∗1  denotes the set of all configurationsC∈W∗ such that there exists a
transition edge inW∗ adjacent toC  and the corresponding packing set to that
transition edge is in the optimal solution of max6(ISP (W∗)). LetV′⊆V  be the
set of vertices that are inW∗1 . Then the size of V′ must be w(OPTSP (W∗)). In
other words,|V\V′| =n−w(OPTSP (W∗)). LetW∗2  be the set of all remaining
configurations ofW∗ that are not inW∗1 . We will prove that, on average, each
configuration inW∗2 (except the initial one) covers at most one element ofV\V′.
    LetCt = (vt1,vt2) be an arbitrary configuration ofW∗2 . We distinguish between
two cases based on whether the previous configurationCt−1, belongs toW∗1  or
not.  (Case-1)Ct−1 ∈W∗1 .  If  the  transition  edge  betweenCt−1  andCt  is  a  1-
transition edge, we have done. Let the edge betweenCt−1 andCt is a 2-transition
edge and both the elements ofCt are in V\V′. In this case, the optimum value
ofmax6SPP , for the instanceISP (W∗), can be uplifted by addingCt as follows:
IfCt−1 is a part of Type-I packing set, the setC1 ={v1t−2,v2t−2,v1t−1,v2t−1} must
be  a  Type-I  packing  set  of  weight  four  and  lies  in  the  optimum  solution.  We
can increased the optimal value by deleting C1  and adding a Type-III packing
set{v1t−2,v2t−2,v1t−1,v2t−1,v1t,v2t} which is of weight six. This is a contradiction.
Similarly, ifCt−1 is a part of the Type-II packing set, we can change the optimal
value by removing the associated packing set of weight three and then inserting
a  Type-IV  packing  set,  which  is  of  weight  five.  IfCt−1  is  a  part  of  the  Type-
III set, we can change the optimal value by deleting the set of weight six and
inserting two sets of Type-I with each of the weights as four. IfCt−1 is a part of
the Type-IV set, we can change the optimal value by deleting the corresponding
packing set of weight five and inserting a set of Type-I with weight four and a set
of Type-III of weight three. All of these updates lead us to a contradiction with
the notion of the optimality ofW∗. Hence, if the transition edge betweenCt and
Ct−1 is a 2-transition edge, then at least one of the elements ofCt must be inV′.
(Case-2)Ct−1 /∈W∗1 . For this case if the transition edge between Ct  and Ct−1
is a 1-transition edge, then we have done. If the transition edge is 2-transition
edge and if we assume that there are at least three elements ofCt∪Ct−1 which
are not in V′, say v1t,v1t−1,v2t−1, then we can again increase the optimum value
by adding the set{v1t,v1t−1,v2t−1,u} with the weight three for someu /∈V , which
is a contradiction. So, if the transition edge betweenCt andCt−1 is 2-transition
edge, then at most two elements among the four elements of{Ct∪Ct−1} are in
V\V′. A similar argument is also valid if the initial configurationC0 is inW∗2 .
To prove this, we can consider the two cases based onC1 is inW∗1  or not.
    Therefore a configuration inW∗2  covers, on average, at most, one vertex of
V\V′. Thus|W∗2|≥|V\V′|≥n−w(OPTSP (W∗))≥n−w(OPTSP (G)). Hence
18         Jana et al.

by using Eq. 1 and 2 we have,

  h2(G) =|W∗1| +|W∗2|− 1≥ w(OPTSP (W∗))2             +n−w(OPTSP (W∗))− 1,
                                                                                              (3)
          ≥n− w(OPTSP (G))2   − 1.

                                                                                                ⊓⊔

    Our  first  step  in  designing  an  approximation  algorithm  is  to  create  a  tree
Tr(G) based on the approximate solution ofmax6(ISP (G)). There are two types
of vertices in the treeTr(G): some are the vertices ofG, and the remaining ones
are  the  edges  of G,  which  we  refer  to  as  contracted  vertices.  We  discuss  the
construction process in the following section.


3.2    Construction of the tree Tr(G) that spans V
LetSol be one of the approximation solutions ofmax6(ISP (G)). Letw(SolSP (G)
) be the value (weight) of the solution returned bySol. Now we do the following:

–  For each Type-I packing set{v1,v2,v3,v4}∈Sol of weight four, we add two
   contracted vertices (v1,v2), (v4,v3) to Tr(G) and connect them by an edge.
   Adding this edge spans 4 distinct vertices ofG and creates a new component.
–  For  each  Type-II  packing  set  (C  ={v1,v2,v3,v4})\{vi}∪{uiC}∈ Sol  of
   weight three for some 1≤i≤ 4, we add two contracted vertices (v1,v2) and
   (v4,v3) to Tr(G), and connect them with an edge, which span three distinct
   vertices of G, since the vertex vi  is already in another packing set S∈ Sol.
   Letvj∈C andvl∈S be the associated vertices contracted with vi. We then
   add an edge between (vi,vj) and (vi,vl), ensuring that all the vertices of C
   and S are part of the same connected component of Tr(G).
–  For  each  Type-III  packing  set{v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6}∈ Sol  of  weight  six,  we
   build three contracted vertices (v1,v2), (v4,v3), (v5,v6) and add toTr(G). We
   join the edges between the first and last two, which span six distinct vertices
   of V  and create one new component.
–  For each Type-IV packing setD = ({v1,v2,v3,v4,v5,v6})\{vi}∪{wiD}∈Sol
   of weight five for some 1≤i≤ 6, we select three contracted vertices (v1,v2),
   (v4,v3), (v5,v6) and add them to Tr(G) with the edges between the first and
   last two, which span five distinct vertices (exceptvi) ofV , wherevi is present
   in  another  packing  set S ∈ Sol.  Let vj ∈ C  and vl∈ S  be  the  associated
   vertices contracted withvi. We also placed an edge between (vi,vj) and (vi,vl)
   that makes all the vertices of C and S in one component of Tr(G).
    The number of vertices inV  included by the above procedure isw(SolSP (G)).
Let, Sol = Sol(I)∪Sol(II)∪Sol(III)∪Sol(IV ), where Sol(i) consists of all
the packing sets of Type-i, i∈{I,II,III,IV}. So, the total number of edges
added after the procedure is  w(Sol(I)SP (G))4          + 2·w(Sol(II)SP (G))3            + w(Sol(III)SP (G))3            +
3·w(Sol(IV )SP (G))
         5            .  The  number  of  trees  in  the  forest Tr(G)  (disjoint  union  of
                                    Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         19

trees)  after  the  procedure  is  w(Sol(I)SP (G))4           +  w(Sol(III)SP (G))6            .  The  number  of
vertices  in V  yet  to  be  spanned  is  (n−w(SolSP (G))).  Since  the  graph G  is
connected,  we  can  always  find  a  contracted  vertex  (v,v′)  in Tr(G)  such  that
v∈V  is not spanned by the above procedure. We add the vertexv′ to the forest
Tr(G) and join the edge between the vertex v and the contracted vertex (v,v′).
After this, we again select a vertex fromV  that is not present in the forestTr(G)
and connect it to one of the vertices ofTr(G). We continue the procedure until it
spans all the vertices ofV . The procedure includes (n−w(SolSP (G))) additional
edges  to  span  all  remaining  (n−w(SolSP (G)))  vertices  of V .  Thereafter,  we
make the forest Tr(G) connected or a single tree. To do so, we find two trees
Tr1  and Tr2  of the forest Tr(G) such that there is an edge e = (v1,v2)∈ E
such  that v1  is  present  in  the  tree Tr1  and v2  is  present  in  the  tree Tr2.  We
include  a  contracted  vertex  (v1,v2)  in  the  forest Tr(G).  Then  we  connect  an
edge  between  (v1,v2)  and  the  vertex  of Tr1  which  contains v1,  and  another
edge between (v1,v2) and the vertex of Tr2 which contains v2. Since there is a
nc =  w(Sol(I)SP (G))4           + w(Sol(III)SP (G))6             number of trees after the first phase of the
procedure, the last phase of the procedure needs exactly (2nc− 2) many edges.
Hence, the total number of edges added after all the procedures is,

 len(Tr(G)) = w(Sol(I)SP (G))4             + 2·w(Sol(II)SP (G))3                + w(Sol(III)SP (G))3

                   + 3·w(Sol(IV )SP (G))5                 + (n−w(SolSP (G)))

                   + 2· (w(Sol(I)SP (G))4             + w(Sol(III)SP (G))6    − 1                    (4)


3.3    Finding an open Hamiltonian walk on the tree Tr(G)
The  above  procedure  implies  that  an  open  Hamiltonian  walk  of Tr(G)  with
one agent corresponds to an open walk of configurations with two agents that
spans  all  the  vertices  in V .  Theorem  1  guarantees  that  for  a  tree  with  diam-
eter d and (n− 1) edges, the length of the optimal open Hamiltonian walk is
2(n−1)−d. To find a better approximation result, here we give an alternative way
to find the open Hamiltonian walk ofTr(G) by using modified  Christofide’s
heuristic proposed by Hoogeveen [11]. The heuristic applies to the complete
weighted graph with weight function satisfying the triangular inequality. There-
fore, we first convert our constructed treeTr(G) into a complete weighted graph
Tr∗(G) as follows: each existing edge ofTr(G) is assigned a weight of one, while
each missing edge between two verticestr1 andtr2 is given a weight equal to the
length of the shortest path between them in the line graph ofG or in G, depend-
ing on whether the vertex is contracted or not. If tr1 or tr2 is a non-contracted
vertex (i.e., in V ), we compute the length between them in G. However, if both
tr1  and tr2  are contracted vertices, we calculate the shortest length in the line
graph ofG. By assigning weights this way, the triangular inequality is preserved.
Next, similar to the modified  Christofide’s  heuristic, we first find the min-
imum spanning tree (MSTTr∗) of the newly created graph Tr∗(G), which gives
20         Jana et al.

the  tree Tr(G).  Then  we  find  the  minimum  matching  (MMTr∗)  between  all
the odd-degree vertices, except for two. The detail and analysis of this heuristic
can be found in [11]. Let cost(MSTTr∗) and cost(MMTr∗) be the cost of the
MSTTr∗ andMMTr∗, respectively. We keep two odd-degree vertices unmatched
as we look for the path, not the cycle. By adding the matching edges, all the ver-
tices inTr(G) become even-degree vertices except two, which is sufficient to get
an Eulerian path (a path traversing each edge exactly once). The length of this
Eulerian path is cost(MSTTr∗) +cost(MMTr∗) =len(Tr(G)) +cost(MMTr∗).
This path can be easily modified to obtain an open walk of a configuration of G
with two agents, without changing its length. Hence, if the complete procedure
as discussed above is referred to asALG2, then the length of the transition walk
returned by ALG2 is tALG2 =len(Tr(G)) +cost(MMTr∗).









































                   Fig. 5: Illustrating a step-by-step execution of the algorithm


    A step-by-step execution of the algorithm is shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5(A) repre-
sents base graph G. Fig. 5(B) depicts all the packing sets{i,j,p,o},{a,b,e,u},
{c,d,h,g,l,k}  selected  by Sol,  where u  is  the  dummy  vertex  for d.  Fig.  5(C)
shows the creation of the forestTr(G).{i,j,p,o} being a Type-I packing set, we
incorporate two vertices (i,j), (o,p) within Tr(G) and insert an edge between
them.{c,d,h,g,k,l} being a Type-III packing set, we add three vertices (c,d),
(g,h), (l,k), and subsequently insert edges to connect them.{a,b,e,u} being a
                                  Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         21

Type-II  packing  set  and u  being  the  dummy  variable  of d,  we  draw  an  edge
between (a,b) and (d,e) and between (c,d) and (d,e). Fig. 5(D) describes the
process of connecting all the leftover vertices{f,m,n} ofG toTr(G). Fig. 5(E)
portrays of converting the forest Tr(G) into tree, where we select an edge (h,i)
that links them. Then, we insert the vertex (h,i) and connect it to both (g,h)
and (i,j). In Fig. 5(F) we convert two odd-degree contracted vertices vertices
(a,b) and (d,e), obtained from the same Type-II packing set, into even-degree
by adding an edge between them. A bound on cost(MMTr∗) is provided in the
lemma below for the final analysis of the procedure ALG2.
Lemma 9. cost(MMTr∗)≤  12(h1(G) +n                oddc), where n     oddc  is the number of
odd-degree contracted vertices in the tree Tr(G).
Proof.  LetW  be one of the optimal walks of configurations with one agent. Let
O =Oc∪Od be the set of odd-degree vertices in the treeTr(G), whereOc is the
set of all contracted odd-degree vertices andOd =O\Oc. We modifyW to make
a walk for the treeTr(G) as follows: for each contracted vertex (v1,v2)∈Oc, we
find the vertex v1 when it first occurs in W , then we add the vertex (v1,v2) in
W  between the vertices v1 andu1, whereu1 is the next vertex of v1 in the walk
W . The length of the walk is h1(G) +n           oddc. Then, similar to Theorem 1 [1],
we can partitionW1 into two matchings, and then by selecting the minimum we
can prove that cost(MMTr∗)≤  12(h1(G) +n              oddc).            ⊓⊔
    By using the above lemma, we havetALG2≤len(Tr(G)) + 12(h1(G) +noddc).
To prove the following lemma, we modify the tree Tr(G) as follows. Lettr1 and
tr2 be two contracted vertices corresponding to some Type-I or Type-II packing
set. If both tr1 and tr2 are odd-degree vertices in the tree Tr(G), then we add
another edge between them. This modification increases the number of edges of
Tr(G) by one, while decreasing the number of odd-degree contracted vertices by
two. Let t′LAG2  be the length of the transition walk returned by our algorithm
ALG2 after this modification. Thent′ALG2≤len(Tr(G))−1+ 12(h1(G)+noddc−
2) =len(Tr(G))+ 12(h1(G)+noddc). Thus, the upper bound on the length of the
walk remains unaltered. Therefore, we assume that, among the two contracted
vertices constructed from a Type-I or Type-II packing set, at least one of them
must be of even degree.
Lemma 10. n        oddc≤  14w(Sol(I)SP (G))+ 13w(Sol(II)SP (G))+ 13w(Sol(III)SP
(G)) + 35w(Sol(IV )SP (G))), where noddc  is the number of odd degree contracted
vertices in the modified tree Tr(G).
By applying Lemma 9 and 10 and Eq. 4, we get
    tALG2 =len(Tr(G)) +cost(MMTr∗)

            ≤n−w(SolSP (G)) + 7·w(Sol(I)SP (G))8               + 5·w(Sol(II)SP (G))6

              + 11·w(Sol(III)SP (G))12                 + 9·w(Sol(IV )SP (G))10    − 2 + h1(G)2

            =n− w(SolSP (G))12   − 2 + h1(G)2
22         Jana et al.

We have w(SolSP (G))≥α·w(OPTSP (G)), where α is the approximation fac-
tor of the approximation algorithm Sol to the set packing problem max6SPP .
Furthermore, w(OPTSP (G))≤ 2h2(G) + 1, as the maximum weight per config-
uration by the construction process is two. We also have h1(G)≤ 2h2(G) + 1,
from Lemma 7 and h2(G)≥ (n− w(OPTSP (G))2   − 1), from Lemma 8. Combining
all these inequalities, we have the following.

    tALG2≤n− α·w(OPTSP (G))12    − 2 +h2(G)− 1

            ≤ (n− w(OPTSP (G)2   − 1) + (12− α12)w(OPTSP (G)) +h2(G)− 2

            ≤h2(G) + (1− α6 )h2(G) +h2(G)  = (3− α6 ) h2(G)

Theorem 4.  There  exists  a  (3−   121)-approximation  algorithm  for  2-HWP.  If
the graph has no C4, the approximation factor reduces to two.

Proof.  The best known approximation algorithm to max6SPP  is  27  by Theiry
and Hard [18]. Using their algorithm as Sol and setting α =  27, we have

                                  tALG2≤ (3−  121)h2(G)

If the graph has noC4, the instanceISP (G) =∅, implies thatw(OPTSP (G)) = 0.
Additionally, all the transitions are being 1-transitions,h2(G) =hr2(G)≥ (n−2).
Hence, from the inequality above, tALG2≤ (n− 2) + (h2(G)− 1)≤ 2h2(G). ⊓⊔

4    k-HWP on Hypergraphs

Here, we formulate the problem k-HWP on hypergraphs and design an approx-
imation  algorithm  to  solve  the  problem.  The  formulation  of  the  problem  and
the  proposed  solution  will  provide  insight  to  obtain  a  solution  for k-HWP  on
the graph. A hypergraph generalizes a graph by allowing each hyperedge to con-
nect any number of vertices. In this paper, we consider the undirectedk-uniform
hypergraph  without  multiple  edges,  where  each  hyperedge  connects  exactly k
vertices.  We  misuse G  =  (V,E)  to  represent  both  the  graph  and  the  hyper-
graph.  However,  a  hyperedge  in  an k-uniform  hypergraph  is  a  subset  of V  of
size k.  The  line  graph L(G)  of  a  hypergraph G  is  a  graph  where  each  vertex
represents a hyperedge ofG, and two vertices are adjacent if their corresponding
hyperedges intersect. The hypergraph G is connected if L(G) is connected.
    Before  defining  the  problem  on  the  hypergraph,  let  us  revisit  the  problem
formulation on the simple graph with k = 2. In 2-HWP, we traverse the graph
via the edges, with transitions classified as shifts or jumps. If the transition edge
between  (xi,yi)  and  (xj,yj)  is  a  1-transition  edge,  the  pairs  share  a  common
vertex,  and  the  move  is  called  a  “shift”.  Otherwise,  it’s  a  2-transition  edge,
where  one  agent  moves  along  (xi,xj)  and  the  other  along  (yi,yj).  After  their
movements, they reach (xj,yj) and the transition is called “jump”. We introduce
                                      Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         23

a similar notion for hypergraphs. Let allk agents initially lie onk distinct vertices
{v01,v02,··· ,v0k} of G such that there is a hyperedge of G, say e0, that connects
all these vertices. In the next step, the movements are one of the following. (i)
All agents move to a hyperedge e1∈ E  such that e0  and e1  are adjacent, i.e.,
they  share  at  least  one  vertex.  This  transition  is  named  “shift”.  (ii)∀i  :  1≤
i ≤ k  the  agent ai  moves  from v0i  to v1i  such  that  there  exists  a  hyperedge
that contains{v0i,v1i}. Moreover, there exists a hyperedge that contains all the
vertices{v11,v12,··· ,v1k}. This transition is named “jump”. Thus, we can assume
each  configuration  to  be  one  of  the  hyperedges,  and  the  traversal  is  through
those hyperedges. We formally define the problem below. The NP-hardness of the
problem is directly derived from the NP-hardness of 2-HWP, since the 2-uniform
hypergraph is equivalent to a simple graph. An example of a hypergraph with
its bipartite graph representation and one of the optimal solutions for k-HWP
on Hypergraph is depicted in Fig. 6

Definition 7(Problem: k-HWP on Hypergraph). Consider an undirected
connected k-uniform hypergraph G along with a collection of k  agents. The task
is  to  find  a  sequence  of  configurations{Ci}  with  minimum  length  where  each
successive  pair  of  configurations  is  adjacent,  and  every  vertex  in G  is  included
at least once in one of these configurations.

































(a)     An     expample     of     undi-(b)  Bipartite  graph  representa-(c) The line graph L(G) with some
rected        3-unform        hypergraphtion of G, where the left partiteaddition “jump” (blue heavy) edges
G    with   V       =  {1, 2,··· , 9},set is the set V  and the right onebetween e1  and e6; e1  and e7; e2
E ={e1, e2,··· , e8}.                is the set E.                     and e5.

              Fig. 6: One of the optimal solution is the transition walk{e1, e7, e6, e8}.


High-level Idea of the Approx. Algorithm for k-HWP on Hypergraph:
We begin by computing the line graph L(G) of the given hypergraph G. The
graph L(G) contains only the shift edges. We then modify L(G) by introduc-
ing all possible jump edges and denote the resulting graph by L∗(G). Next, we
search  for  a  minimum  length  walk  of L∗(G)  that  spans  all  the  vertices  of V .
To achieve this, we create an instanceICSC(G) of the   minimum connected set
cover  problem  (MCSC) [20] from the graph L∗(G). In MCSC, we are given an
24         Jana et al.

universe of elements U, a family of subsetsF  ={S} where each S⊆U, and a
connected graph where each vertex represents a unique S∈F. The objective is
to find a minimum size subfamilyF′⊆F such that each element ofU is present
in some of the members ofF′ and the vertices associated withF′ induce a con-
nected subgraph of the given graph. ForICSC(G), we consider the vertex set V
as the universe, the set of hyperedges E as the family of subsets, and L∗(G) is
the underlying connected subgraph. Using the best known approximation algo-
rithm for MCSC by Zhang et al. [20], which is of factor (1 + lnk), we derive a
connected subgraph ofL∗(G), saySol, that covers all the vertices of V . Finally,
we  transform Sol  into  a  walk  by  doubling  all  its  edges,  yielding  a  solution  of
k-HWP on the hypergraph G. The size of the solution is
Detailed Description of the Approximation Algorithm for k-HWP on
Hypergraph: First, we compute the line graph L(G) of the given hypergraph
G. The edges ofL(G) consist only of the shift edges. So, we remain to search all
possible jump edges. Therefore, we determine the open neighbourhood N(vi) of
each vertexvi, which is the set of verticesui such that there exists an edgee′∈E
that contains{ui,vi}. Now, for each edge e ={v1,v2,··· ,vk}∈E, we consider
all possible sets of the form{u1,u2,··· ,uk}, whereui∈N(vi)∀i∈{1, 2,··· ,k},
and check if there is an edgee′′ that connects the vertices{u1,u2,··· ,uk}. If so,
add an edge betweene ande′′ on the line graphL(G). There are at mostk·∆(G)
such sets for eache∈E, where∆(G) = maxv∈V|N(v)|. We can discover all the
jump edges in polynomial time. Let us give an unique id to each vertex vi∈V
from the set{1, 2,··· ,n}. We assume that thek-uniform hypergraph is stored in
ak-dimensional array. The entry of (i1,i2,··· ,ik}⊂{1, 2,··· ,n} is one if there
is an edge that connects the vertices{v1,v2,··· ,vk}, otherwise zero. So, we can
find whether there is an edge that connects the vertices{u1,u2,··· ,uk} inO(k)
time. Thus, for a fixed hyperedgee, we can find all edgese′′ for which there is a
jump edge between them inO(k2·∆(G)) time. Hence, all the jump edges of the
line graph L(G) can be computed in O(m·k2·∆(G)), where m is the number
of hyperedges of G. We denote this modified line graph by L∗(G). Any solution
of k-HWP on hypergraphs is an open walk on graph L∗(G). Thus, the problem
reduces to finding a minimum length walk of the graph L∗(G) that covers all
the vertices of V . We solve it using a subroutine of the minimum connected set
cover problem, defined below.
Minimum Connected Set Cover Problem(MCSC): We have given a universeU of
elements and a familyF ={S} of subsets of that universe such that∪SS∈F =V .
Any set cover is a subfamilyF′⊆F  such that each element of U  is present in
one of the elements inF′. Minimum set cover is the set cover with the minimum
cardinality. The instance of the MCSC contains an additional connected graph
whose vertex set isF, which means that each S∈F  is considered a vertex of
the graph. The objective is to find a set coverF′ with minimum cardinality such
that the vertices associated withF′  induce a connected subgraph of the given
graph.  Finding  a  minimum  set  cover  is  NP-hard.  A  simple  greedy  algorithm
gives an approximation factor (1 + ln(∆)), which is calculated using the pricing
method  and ∆  =  maxS∈F|S|.  Trevisan  [19]  showed  that  the  problem  cannot
                                   Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         25

be approximated within the factor (ln(∆)−O(ln(ln(∆)))) unless P=NP. Dinur
and Steurer [7] also established that the approximation of the set cover problem
to within factor (1−ϵ) lnn is NP hard for every ϵ > 0 and n being the size of
the universe. This result ensures that the (1 + ln(∆))-approximation algorithm
is asymptotically best unless P=NP. Zhang et al. [20] proposed the (1 + ln(∆))-
approximation algorithm and an inapproximable bound to the MCSC.
    From  a  given  instance  of k-HWP  in  hypergraph  (G),  we  can  construct  an
instanceICSC(G) of the connected set cover problem by considering the vertex
set (V ) as the universe, the set of hyperedges (E) as the family of subsets, and
the line graph L∗(G) as the underlying connected subgraph. Any solution to k-
HWP on hypergraphG is a feasible solution to the connected set cover problem
for the instanceICSC(G). So OPT (ICSC(G))≤hk(G), where OPT (ICSC(G))
is  the  optimum  solution  to  the  connected  set  cover  problem  for  the  instance
ICSC(G).  Let Sol  be  a  solution  to  the  connected  set  cover  problem  for  the
instanceICSC(G) using a β-approximation algorithm from the literature, and
let|Sol|  be  the  size  of  that  solution.  Then|Sol|≤ β·OPT (ICSC(G)).  For  a
given connected subgraph ofL∗(G) induced by the vertices ofSol, we can always
construct a walk, by doubling all the edges and then finding an Eulerian walk.
This walk is of length at most 2|Sol|, which forms a feasible solution to k-HWP
on the hypergraphG. So we have an approximate solution (ALGHG) tok-HWP
on G with a solution size (tALGHG) at most 2·|Sol|≤ 2·β·OPT (ICSC(G))≤
2β·hk(G).

Theorem 5.  There exists a 2(1 + lnk)-approximation algorithm for k-HWP on
hypergraph.

Proof.  We  obtain  the  factor  by  applying  the  best  known  approximation  algo-
rithm  of  the  connected  set  cover  problem,  which  is  proposed  by  Zhang  et  al.
[20], i.e., by setting β = (1 + lnk), as in our case ∆ =k.         ⊓⊔

Theorem 6.  There exists a 2(1 + lnk)-approximation algorithm for k-HWP on
a simple graph, when k =O(1).

Proof.  For a given connected graphG, we construct an instance of the connected
set  cover  problem,  where  the  universe  is  the  vertex  set V ,  and  the  family  of
subsets (F) consists of all possible connected subgraphs of G of size k. There
can  be  at  most nk  such  subsets  of V .  For  a  given S⊂ V  of  size k,  we  check
the connectivity of the induced subgraph made by the vertices of S inO(k +m)
time. Therefore, we need nO(k) time to construct the familyF. Next, we build
the  underlying  connected  graph G  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  above  process
mentioned in the algorithm for k-HWP on hypergraph. The only difference is
that,  for  each  vertex vi ∈ V   we  consider  its  closed  neighbourhood N[vi]  =
N(vi)∪{vi}, as in the definition ofk-HWP on the graph allows an agent to remain
stationary.  Thus,  by  a  similar  argument  to  that  above,  we  can  estimate  the
proposed result. However, the complexity of time is dominated by the polynomial
nk. So, the algorithm runs in polynomial-time algorithm only if k =O(1).  ⊓⊔
26         Jana et al.

5    Conclusion

In  this  paper,  we  examine  the  Hamiltonian  walk  problem  within  the  context
of a connected group of mobile agents that minimally traverse the graph. The
NP-hardness of the problem leads us to find some approximation algorithms. We
propose an approximation algorithm for the problem with a set of two agents for
any arbitrary graph. Then we define the problem on hypergraphs and provide
an approximation algorithm. We also show some optimal results for the acyclic
graph. Additionally, we define a restricted version of the problem in which each
transition explores only one new vertex compared to the previous one. In the
future, exploring tighter bounds for the problem and investigating the class of
graphs in which a polynomial solution exists will be interesting.

References

 1.Arkin, E.M., Hassin, R.: On local search for weighted k-set packing. Mathematics
     of Operations Research 23(3), 640–648 (1998)
 2.Arora, S.: Polynomial time approximation schemes for euclidean tsp and other ge-
     ometric problems. In: Proceedings of 37th Conference on Foundations of Computer
     Science. pp. 2–11. IEEE (1996)
 3.Chandra, B., Halld´orsson, M.M.: Greedy local improvement and weighted set pack-
     ing approximation. Journal of Algorithms 39(2), 223–240 (2001)
 4.Cheikhrouhou, O., Khoufi, I.: A comprehensive survey on the multiple traveling
     salesman problem: Applications, approaches and taxonomy. Computer Science Re-
     view 40, 100369 (2021)
 5.Christofides,   N.:   Worst-case   analysis   of   a   new   heuristic   for   the   trav-
     eling   salesman   problem.   Carnegie   Mellon   University   3,      10   (03   2022).
     https://doi.org/10.1007/s43069-021-00101-z
 6.Demaine, E.D., Hajiaghayi, M., Mohar, B.: Approximation algorithms via contrac-
     tion decomposition. Combinatorica 30, 533–552 (2010)
 7.Dinur, I., Steurer, D.: Analytical approach to parallel repetition. In: Proceedings
     of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. pp. 624–633
     (2014)
 8.Emek, Y., Halld´orsson, M.M., Mansour, Y., Patt-Shamir, B., Radhakrishnan, J.,
     Rawitz, D.: Online set packing. SIAM Journal on Computing 41(4), 728–746 (2012)
 9.Goodman, S.E., Hedetniemi, S.T.: On hamiltonian walks in graphs. SIAM Journal
     on Computing 3(3), 214–221 (1974)
10.Grigni, M., Koutsoupias, E., Papadimitriou, C.: An approximation scheme for pla-
     nar  graph  tsp.  In:  Proceedings  of  IEEE  36th  Annual  Foundations  of  Computer
     Science. pp. 640–645. IEEE (1995)
11.Hoogeveen,     J.:     Analysis     of     christofides’     heuristic:     Some     paths     are
     more    difficult    than    cycles.    Operations    Research    Letters    10(5),    291–
     295       (1991).       https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-6377(91)90016-I,
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/016763779190016I
12.Karlin, A.R., Klein, N., Gharan, S.O.: A (slightly) improved approximation algo-
     rithm for metric tsp. In: Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Sympo-
     sium on Theory of Computing. pp. 32–45 (2021)
                                     Graph Traversal via Connected Mobile Agents         27

13.Karp, R.M.: Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In: 50 Years of Integer
     Programming 1958-2008: from the Early Years to the State-of-the-Art, pp. 219–
     241. Springer (2009)
14.Klein, P.N.: A linear-time approximation scheme for planar weighted tsp. In: 46th
     Annual  IEEE  Symposium  on  Foundations  of  Computer  Science  (FOCS’05).  pp.
     647–656. IEEE (2005)
15.Mitchell, J.S.: Guillotine subdivisions approximate polygonal subdivisions: A sim-
     ple polynomial-time approximation scheme for geometric tsp, k-mst, and related
     problems. SIAM Journal on computing 28(4), 1298–1309 (1999)
16.Serdyukov,   A.I.:   O   nekotorykh   ekstremal’nykh   obkhodakh   v   grafakh.   Up-
     ravlyayemyye sistemy 17, 76–79 (1978)
17.Sviridenko, M., Ward, J.: Large neighborhood local search for the maximum set
     packing problem. In: International colloquium on automata, languages, and pro-
     gramming. pp. 792–803. Springer (2013)
18.Thiery,  T.,  Ward,  J.:  An  improved  approximation  for  maximum  weighted  k-set
     packing. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms (SODA). pp. 1138–1162. SIAM (2023)
19.Trevisan, L.: Non-approximability results for optimization problems on bounded
     degree instances. In: Proceedings of the thirty-third annual ACM symposium on
     Theory of computing. pp. 453–461 (2001)
20.Zhang, W., Wu, W., Lee, W., Du, D.Z.: Complexity and approximation of the con-
     nected set-cover problem. Journal of Global Optimization 53(3), 563–572 (2012)