      Large Language Model Scaling Laws for Neural
               Quantum States in Quantum Chemistry




        Oliver Knitter1,2,∗         Dan Zhao2,3       Stefan Leichenauer2    Shravan Veerapaneni1

                  1University of Michigan     2SandboxAQ     3New York University
                                  *knitter@umich.edu, currently at IonQ


                                                     Abstract

          Scaling laws have been used to describe how large language model (LLM) per-
          formance scales with model size, training data size, or amount of computational
          resources. Motivated by the fact that neural quantum states (NQS) has increasingly
          adopted LLM-based components, we seek to understand NQS scaling laws, thereby
          shedding light on the scalability and optimal performance–resource trade-offs of
          NQS ansatze. In particular, we identify scaling laws that predict the performance,
          as measured by absolute error and V-score, for transformer-based NQS as a func-
          tion of problem size in second-quantized quantum chemistry applications.  By
          performing analogous compute-constrained optimization of the obtained paramet-
          ric curves, we find that the relationship between model size and training time is
          highly dependent on loss metric and ansatz, and does not follow the approximately
          linear relationship found for language models.

1    Introduction

Electronic ground state calculations are a fundamental problem inab initioquantum chemistry. As
explicit calculation of the ground truth scales exponentially with molecule size, heuristic algorithms
based on the variational principle have been devised including Hartree-Fock, coupled cluster methods
[2], and tensor network methods such as DMRG [23].
The incorporation of LLM components into NQS opens these ansatze up to systematic scalability
analysis using scaling laws [15], mathematical relationships that describe how the computational
requirements of a neural network model scale with the size of the underlying problem.  For NLP,
scaling laws have helped reveal how the performance of specific models grows with access to greater
training data and compute resources. These laws help predict the limits of model capabilities, optimize
the allocation of resources, and guide development of new architectures.
Applying this broad analysis of NQS performance across different problem types is largely made
possible by the introduction of V-Score, [28], a problem-agnostic and model-agnostic metric analyzing
performance of any algorithm designed to find the minimal eigenstate of a Hamiltonian. With it, the
application of these scaling laws to NQS ansatze may prove fruitful, allowing us to systematically
assess the efficiency and effectiveness of different neural architectures for representing quantum states
within an application of such practical interest. Understanding the scaling behavior of autoregressive
NQS ansatze is particularly important as it would:

        •  Identify optimal neural architectures balancing accuracy, computational cost, and scalability.
          This is essential in quantum chemistry, where solving even fundamental problems requires
          ansatze that are sufficiently expressive at favorable model sizes.
        •  Illuminate the strengths and weaknesses of NQS as an overall paradigm, highlighting specific
          areas where improvements in model design could lead to substantial gains in performance.
        •  Gauge the broader applicability of these models for addressing larger molecular systems,
           more complex chemical environments, or general tasks beyond ground state energies.

Contributions.We estimate and analyze Chinchilla-like scaling laws [           12] for autoregressive NQS
models in solving/estimating electronic ground states. Drawing parallels with LLM scaling laws, we
examine whether similar principles govern the efficiency and accuracy of deep learning architectures
in the NQS domain.  We focus on analyzing three specific autoregressive ansatze, based on three
well-known architectures: MADE [30], transformers [29], and retentive networks (RetNets) [17].
Our analysis focuses on comparing the performance and costs of these architectures to better un-
derstand how they scale with model size and training time, relative to problem size.  Inspired by
similar estimation frameworks for LLMs [15], we introduce general floating point operation (FLOP)
estimates for NQS problems as a proxy for compute costs.  Our goal is to provide guidance for
optimizing NQS performance in quantum chemistry by appropriately prioritizing the use of available
compute resources for a given problem and molecule size.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section3gives an overview of the general problem formulation.
Section3.2describes the NQS paradigm and the autoregressive ansatze under consideration.  We
detail the use of scaling laws in LLMs and how we apply them in our ansatz experiments for NQS in
section4. We summarize our findings in section5and conclude with a discussion of our findings and
future directions in section6.

2    Related Work

Recent advances have used neural networks trained via variational Monte Carlo [6] as an alternative
variational ansatz. Known as neural quantum states (NQS), this method offers a potentially scalable
solver for electronic ground state calculations [7] with many variants based on autoregressive ansatze
[1, 3, 30] such as the transformer architecture [29] among others [17] as autoregressive ansatze,
given the inherent expressiveness and utility of transformers within large language models (LLMs).
However, further exploration is still necessary to understand how well these architectures perform
and scale as NQS ansatze.
Scaling law analyses [10, 15] empirically study how LLM performance can scale with model or
data size, computational resources, etc. The eponymous Chinchilla scaling laws [12] estimated that
doubling the size of a LLM requires a doubling in the number of training tokens for optimality. Since
then, similar efforts have studied scaling behavior in transfer learning settings for downstream tasks
[14], the influence on scaling behavior of inductive biases in model architectures [26], effects of
scaling on smaller language model trade-offs [13], the potential impact of synthetic data on scaling
and model collapse [8], how data-constrained language models scale with repeated data [21], and
scaling-informed optimization of model/data sizes when accounting for inference demand [22].
Scaling properties of NQS have been studied in time-evolved quantum states [18] focusing on training
unnormalized RBM ansatze [6] and variations of the autoregressive NAQS ansatz [24] under different
Ising Hamiltonians. Our analysis is fundamentally similar with a few distinct caveats. We consider
more sophisticated ansatz architectures, designed for greater expressiveness with respect to size.
Furthermore, we are interested in exploring the scaling properties of autoregressive ansatze applied
to a specific practical use case. While [18] indicates NQS ansatze likely require exponentially many
parameters to model all possible states of an exponentially large quantum system,  the required
expressiveness for practical applications may be much lower.

3    Problem

3.1    Preliminaries

Calculating the energy of a molecule requires knowledge of its wavefunction, represented by a unit
vector|ψ⟩     in a complex Hilbert space, and its electronic Hamiltonian: a Hermitian operatorHe on
this space encoding the total kinetic and potential energy of the molecule. Its ground state energy
corresponds to the minimal spectral value ofHe.  Under the Born–Oppenheimer approximation,
the relatively heavy atomic nuclei are treated as classical point charges, leaving the electrons to be
modeled as quantum particles [5].


                                                            2
Figure 1: A general autoregressive NQS ansatz|ψ θ⟩. The model takes a qubit configurationx and
returns either the ansatz entry⟨x|ψ  θ⟩ or conditional probabilities Prob(x     j|x k<j).  The modulus
network is an autoregressive model that directly contributes to both outputs, while the phase network
is typically an MLP only contributing to the ansatz entry.


Given a set of orthonormal spin-orbitals{ϕ j}nj=1  , second quantization and the Jordan–Wigner trans-
formation together mapHe to a HamiltonianH in ann-qubit state space [20], whose computational
basis corresponds with occupancy configurations, known asSlater determinants, of the         n spin-orbitals.
The smallest eigenvalue ofH, also called the ground state energy, approximates the energy of the
true molecular ground state. We considerHas a real linear combination of Pauli strings:
                              H= Xωj            σj1⊗···⊗σ  jn        ,  σjk∈{I,X,Y,Z}                               (1)
                                       j
where the set{I,X,Y,Z}      denotes the four Pauli matrices. These strings form an orthonormal basis
for the 4n-dimensional space ofn-qubit Hamiltonians; the construction ofH ensures that the number
of terms in (1) is  O(n     4) [20]. To find the ground state, we consider the expectation value ofH with
respect to|ψ  θ⟩, ann-qubit variational ansatz:
                                                  L(θ) =⟨ψ     θ|H|ψ   θ⟩                                                         (2)
By the Rayleigh–Ritz principle, the only minimum for (2) is the ground state energy of  H, in which
case|ψ θ⟩ represents an associated eigenvector. The goal is then to variationally optimizeθ to find
this ground state.

3.2    Autoregressive Neural Quantum States

Neural quantum states [6] is a classical deep learning architecture for solving variational many-body
problems using a neural network ansatz.  Over the past few years, serious interest has manifested
toward addressing electronic ground state problems with NQS [7], particularly using autoregressive
ansatze [1, 17, 29, 30]; we exclusively consider the autoregressive formulation in this paper.  An
n-qubit NQS ansatz is a neural network that maps bit strings of lengthn to complex numbers. For
the purposes of training, we consider these outputs as the complex logarithm of the ansatz:
                                      log⟨x|ψ     θ⟩= logψ   θ(x) :{0,1}      n→C                                         (3)
Autoregressive ansatze encode these values in two networks: a phase netϕθ returning a single number,
and a modulus net returning an autoregressive sequence of nested conditional probabilities:
                                 logp  jθ(x  1,...,xj) = log (Pr (x j = 1|x k<j;θ))
The individual network outputs are collected into the ansatz output
                                                            nX
                                      log⟨x|ψ     θ⟩=   12      pjθ(x k≤j    ) +iϕ θ(x)                                          (4)
                                                           j=1

                                                               3
This specific construction ensures the ansatz always encodes a normalized quantum state, which is
significant because every state induces a probability distribution on the set of qubit spin configurations,
                                                      Pr (x;θ) =|⟨x|ψ        θ⟩|2

and we may rewrite the expectation (2) as a stochastic loss function with respect to this distribution:

                                    L(θ) =E    x∼|ψ   θ|2 [l θ(x)],  l   θ(x) = ⟨x|H|ψ    θ⟩⟨x|ψ  θ⟩                                        (5)

The valuelθ(x)     in (5) is called thelocal energyof     H atx. The autoregressive ansatz construction
makes efficient sampling from|ψ θ|2 possible, through use of the conditional probabilities generated
by the modulus network to sample spins qubit-by-qubit.  For each samplex, the local energy is
constructed by multiplying all nonzero entries in rowx ofH with the corresponding entries of|ψ θ⟩,
then adding the results.  In practice, the set of unique samples is stored and a list of frequencies
monitors how often each is sampled with replacement [30].  Explicit constraints are built into the
network to ensure the state distribution only samples from physically plausible Slater determinants:
the full Hilbert space considers all orbital occupancy configurations, but most do not correspond
with the correct number of electrons in the molecule. As in (5), we can rewrite the gradient of the
expectation as a stochastic estimator over the state distribution:
                                ∇θL(θ) = 2 ReE     x∼|ψ   θ|2 [(l θ(x)−b)∇      θ log⟨ψ   θ|x⟩]                               (6)
The baselinebis arbitrary but typically chosen asb=L(θ)for purposes of variance reduction.

3.3    Types of Autoregressive NQS Ansatze


       Model                Sequential Forward FLOP Estimate             Full Ansatz Training FLOP Estimate
       MADE   3N                     BT                (1.5n+ 3M+ 10−3 logB)N                                                   mod + 2(M+ 3)N                 ph
       RetNet n                seq (2N+ 4n              bnseqdattn)(Parallel)BT               ((M+ 4)n−2 logB)N                                         mod + 2(M+ 3)N                 ph
                       nseq  2N+ 5n           b(d   attn)2 (Recurrent)+n                               bdm×(2.5d                m ((M+ 1)n−2 logB) + 3n                                2)
       Transformern                         seq (2N+ 4n              bnseqdattn)        BT     (M+ 4)n−                43 logB      Nmod + 2(M+ 3)N                 ph
                                                                 +n     bdm  (M+ 3.5)n            2−  89 logB−            23 (logB)            2 

Table 1: Estimates of the total FLOP counts required both to perform one forward pass of MADE,
RetNet,  and transformer on an input sequence,  based on parameter count N=N         mod +N    phase,
sequence lengthnseq, number of decoder blocksnb, and the attention/retention dimensiondattn; and
to train a corresponding NQS ansatz, based on qubit numbern, training stepsT , average numberB
of unique samples processed, and unique bit flip termsM in the problem Hamiltonian. RetNet and
Transformer estimates require the numbern                 b of blocks and the internal dimensiond                        m.

Figure1depicts a general autoregressive NQS ansatz, highlighting both modulus and phase networks.
The three ansatze examined in this work all follow this form, using a simple feedforward network
to model the phase, which is joined by a sequence of autoregressive decoder blocks modeling the
conditional probabilities. They differ only in the type of decoder used: in this paper, we consider the
MADE [30], RetNet [17], and transformer [29] architectures. Reserving a more detailed description
of them for the appendix, we emphasize here that each model enforces the autoregressive constraint
on its outputs in a distinct way. Fundamentally, MADE [9] follows a basic feedforward architecture; a
fixed binary mask is applied to the model weights in each forward pass, severing connections between
neurons so as to ensure the autoregressive property.  This makes MADE easy to sample from and
train in a parallelizable way, at the expense of making it a fundamentally less expressive architecture
relative to model size.
Transformers [27] calculate all pairwise dot product similarities within each input sequence. Attention
can be made autoregressive through input masking, and is highly parallelizable, though at the expense
of introducing a quadratic computational cost with respect to input sequence length. RetNets [25]
are recurrent architectures, which are innately autoregressive and perform forward passes in linear
time. RetNets compress into a mathematically equivalent parallel form analogous to the transformer;
utilizing these two forms during inference and training respectively allows RetNet to utilize both the
time complexity advantage of recurrent networks and the greater ease of training of transformers. We


                                                                    4
describe in table1leading term estimates for the FLOP count required by each of these models to
perform a single forward pass on a single input sequence, from which it is possible to extrapolate
FLOP count estimations for an entire NQS training run.  We provide detailed derivations of these
estimates in AppendixA.4.

4    Methodology

We introduce a general framework for FLOP count estimation to quantify the computational cost
of NQS. Drawing on the Chinchilla laws [12], we present a parametric scaling law for NQS and
describe the specific experimental setup of our analysis.

4.1    FLOP Estimates for NQS

Typically, supervised learning only requires one forward and one backward pass through the model
for each batch sample at each gradient update step.  NQS, however, does not have training data,
instead using the model to first generate a batch of sample spins fromx∼|ψ  θ|2, and then calculate
local energies. For each samplex, this requires not only one forward pass to obtain⟨x|ψ  θ⟩, but many
more to calculate the numerator⟨x|H|ψ    θ⟩. Each termPi in (1) defines a specific bit flip sequence:
applying this flip tox yields the indexx′ of the term⟨x′|ψ θ⟩ that corresponds with a nonzero entry
ofPi. Each bit flip adds an additional forward pass to the compute cost. Before training, all unique
bit flip sequences are identified between the terms ofH, eliminating redundant forward passes [29].
Nonetheless, a significant number of forward passes remains, though none of them contribute to the
gradient calculation, yielding some compute cost savings depending on the ansatz.
For an NQS problem, we estimate the training FLOP count based on the numbern= 2n      seq of qubits,
the average unique sample batch sizeB at each iteration, the single-token FLOP countFmod of the
modulus network, the single-sequence FLOP countFph of the phase network, the numberM  of
unique bit flip patterns withinH, and the training stepsT . We estimate the sampling FLOP count as
                                                  
                                                     ⌊log  4B⌋−1X            n                  
                      FLOPSample≈F    modT                      4m +B        2−⌊log  4B⌋                                 (7)

                                                        m=0

For  ease  of  approximation,  we  assume  at  each  step  the  sampling  process  starts  from  the  four
configurations of a single orbital and branches intoB unique samples in approximately log4(B)
steps. The remaining steps are needed to identify the full spin configuration for each sample. This
assumption is an overestimate, since the sampling process is less costly if it does not branch this
quickly. Then, the FLOP count to construct and backpropagate through (5) is approximately

                                                                     n
                                FLOPLoss≈BT             (M+ 3)        2Fmod +F    ph                                   (8)

For each sample at each time step, (8) covers  M forward passes for the local energy numerator, one
for the denominator, and then backpropagation—approximately equivalent to two forward passes.
We ignore the FLOP count for assembling the model outputs into loss values as they contribute no
leading terms to the overall count. We also note thatFmod is implicitly context-dependent even within
eqs. (7) and (8); for each ansatz,F                         mod may vary based on the corresponding phase of training.
From derivations provided in sectionA.4, we arrive at the ansatz-specific FLOP count estimates for
MADE, RetNet, and transformer shown in table1. For the latter two ansatze, we set    dattn =d    m. In
all cases, we consider separately the number of parametersN=N         mod +N    ph for the modulus and
phase networks, respectively, ignoring all non-leading terms. KV caching can reduce some of the
transformer compute cost, for a considerable increase in memory. Accomplishing this cost savings
would also require cache sharing between separate forward passes to an atypical extent.  Though
this paper performs FLOP-constrained scaling law analysis using rougher estimates given in table4,
which have been simplified for ease of analysis, we introduce these three estimate formulas here as
general resources for assessing the compute cost of the MADE, transformer, and RetNet ansatze.


                                                            5
4.2    Parametric Scaling Law for NQS

We now derive NQS scaling laws to identify predictive relationships between accuracy/performance
and several key attributes of NQS: model size, compute budget, problem size, and the number of
unique samples used for training. In practice, the search space grows too quickly with problem size to
allow for sampling from all feasible spins under a fixed compute budget, so we truncate the number
of unique samples generated at each sampling run. Since these samples contribute to the loss function
analogously to training data, the total number obtained in training serves as a proxy for the number of
tokens used in traditional scaling law analysis.
AppendixA.6gives a brief overview of the Chinchilla scaling law [                     12] establishing basic power law
relationships between the final training lossL, model sizeN, and numberD of tokens used.  To
adapt this curve to NQS, we must consider that any scaling analysis predicting the general behavior
of an ansatz across a variety electronic ground state calculations must account for performance
differences caused by training on different molecules.  Increasing problem size, while keeping all
other hyperparameters equal, is expected to both increase computational cost and decrease accuracy
for any ansatz. To help the scaling law account for variation in problem size, we propose incorporating,
in addition to the numberN of model parameters (per thousand), a new termSF equaling the average
fraction of the total search space that is sampled throughout training. For a molecular system with
n spin-orbitals,NE electrons, and a singlet ground state—where the electrons are equally divided   0.5n 2

among the up and down spins—the search space size is                    0.5N  E     .

This calculation is analogous for molecules with nonzero spin, though all molecules used for analysis
in section4.3have either singlet or triplet ground states. For a given NQS run, we then obtain       SF  by
dividing the average numberB of unique samples generated at each iteration by the search space size.
SinceSF  incorporates information about the number of unique samples seen at each optimization
step, we multiply it by the numberTof optimization steps to give
                                                    D′ =T×SF
a size-controlled analog to the variableDfrom [12].
Since different molecules have different energies, we modify the loss L(N,D ′):  absolute error
between the NQS result and the ground truth, obtainable for moderate problem sizes via full con-
figuration interaction (FCI), is a suitable measure since an error tolerance within 0.00159    Hartree
is a widely accepted standard of chemical accuracy.  Unfortunately, absolute error is not viable at
scale since FCI calculations quickly become intractable.  As such, we also consider the V-Score
[28], a recent performance metric for assessing variational Hamiltonian eigensolvers. For ann-qubit
HamiltonianHand ansatz|ψ                θ⟩, the V-Score is given by
                                                    
ψθ|H  2|ψ θ−⟨ψ θ|H|ψ   θ⟩2
                                   V-Score =n             ⟨ψ θ|H|ψ   θ⟩−ω    02                                                (9)

where ω0  is  the  weight  value  from  (1)  corresponding  with  identity  operator.   Both  (2)  and  its
variance—the numerator in (9)—may be estimated by the sample mean and variance of (5). V-Score
was developed as a proxy measure for relative error, and it is both dimensionless and invariant
with respect to global energy shifts. These properties make V-Score a natural candidate for scaling
law analysis. Altogether, we consider two modifications of the Chinchilla curve for assessing the
performance of NQS models for electronic ground state calculations:

          ErrorAbs(N,D ′) =A    0 + A1Nα1  + A2D′α 2, V-Score(N,D     ′) =A    0 + A1Nα1  + A2D′α 2       (10)

4.3    Experimental Setup

We apply each ansatz to each of the molecules in table2, performing a coarse ablation varying model
size—both modulus and phase networks—optimization steps, and the maximum number of unique
samples generated per step. We perform all training with Adam, annealing the learning rate along
a cosine schedule from 2.5×10   −3    to 5×10  −8   , with a linear warmup over the first 4% of steps.
Following the same practice from [17], we exponentially increase the number of non-unique samples
at each step from 104 to 1012, and for the first 90% of training, we only recompute the loss every 10


                                                             6
                            Moleculen  N      E       Determinants       Paulis M            FCI
                               H2O           14        10                441                1,390         190 −75.0155
                                N2            20        14              14,400             2,591         446 −107.6602
                                O2            20        16               2,025              2,879         530 −147.7502
                               H2S           22        18               3,025              9,558        1,524−394.3546
                               PH3           24        18              48,400            24,369       4,333−338.6984
                               LiCl           28        20           1,002,001          24,255       4,508−460.8496
                              Li2O          30        14          41,409,225         20,558       3,810−87.8927
Table 2: Molecules whose second quantized (in the the STO-3G basis set) Hamiltonians were used
for analysis. We list the corresponding number of spin-orbitals, electrons, Slater determinants in the
search space, Pauli basis terms, and unique bit flip patterns among the Pauli terms. FCI ground truth
values from [29] are also shown.













Figure 2:  Heat maps showing the final V-score and loss values for each data point collected for
the transformer ansatz, as a function of both model parametersN  and scaled iterationsD′. Since
the variance and loss values comprising the V-score are stochastic estimates, we depict 10−8    as the
lower limit of V-score accuracy, while absolute loss values are truncated at 10−5    to reflect desired
thresholds of chemical accuracy.


steps. We also incorporate variational neural annealing (VNA) [11] to improve accuracy. We vary the
number of training steps between 12,500 and 50,000, the model dimensions of RetNet and transformer
between 8 and 64—the internal feedforward dimension always equals 4x this dimension—and the
hidden state dimensions of the MADE and phase networks between 8 and 128. For both RetNet and
transformer, we utilized 1 or 2 decoder blocks. The maximum number of unique samples generated
at each step was varied between 1,000 and 16,000.
We follow [17] in choosing the final loss value of each training run. We fit Eq. (10) to our data as
in [12], replacing zero absolute error values with 10−5    to avoid issues with the log-loss and using
Adam alongside a cosine-annealed learning rate for 50,000 steps, with initial parameters taken from
ranges given for the original Chinchilla law [4,12].

5    Results

We collected 335 datapoints applying the three ansatze to the problems in table2: 120 for MADE, 109
for RetNet, and 106 for transformer. We observe in fig.2the distribution of data points collected for
transformer, to which those of MADE and RetNet are qualitatively similar and given in sectionA.7.
These heat maps display the V-scores and absolute loss values as functions of the variablesN andD′
as defined in section4.2: the figures qualitatively indicate a correlation between       N,D′, and both
dependent variables. Similar trends are observable within the data sets for both the tranformer and
RetNet ansatze. Reserving some discussion of these other models for the appendix, we emphasize
how similar the RetNet behavior in fig.5is to that of the transformer shown here. In general, the data
point distributions of the two networks are directly comparable, since RetNet and transformer ansatze
of equivalent dimension have nearly identical numbers of parameters; likewise, both models train
similarly under equivalent setups [17].
In both cases, we observe a pronounced stratification of the data point distribution with respect to
N. A similar stratification is visible in fig.4, but that data set succeeds in covering a wider range of
parameter sizes. This difference is due to the fact that the architecture of RetNets and transformers is


                                                                  7
Figure 3: Heat maps showing the logarithm of the FLOP count estimates for all data points collected
with each of the three ansatze. In all three cases, FLOP count does not decrease monotonically with
respect to scaled iterations, indicating the latter is not merely a proxy for problem size.


less explicitly dependent on problem size than that of MADE. Furthermore, in testing, we maintained
a fixed ratio of 8 hidden dimensions per attention/retention head inside each transformer and RetNet.


                  V-score    A          0         A1        A2      α1    α2          Log-R        2

                   MADE 9.37×10      −11        2.58×10   −5        5.53×10   −2        1.459      2.828        0.68
                   RetNet  6.71×10      −7              0.626           4.39×10    −3        9.370      2.451        0.40
                Transformer1.34×10        −6              0.197           7.25×10    −3        7.952      2.371        0.53

               Absolute Error   A         0         A1        A2      α1    α2          Log-R        2

                   MADE  4.12×10      −9              0.033                0.106           2.224      0.757        0.65
                   RetNet  1.13×10      −4         5.26×10   −4              0.111           0.452      1.179        0.49
                Transformer2.83×10        −9              0.720                0.039           5.274      0.637        0.62
Table 3: Parametric curve parameters for MADE, RetNet, and transformer NQS ansatze, for both
V-score and Loss data.R2 are given on a log–log scale between model outputs and true loss values.


Following the training procedure from section4.3, we have identified parametric curve coefficients,
shown in table3for (10) for all three ansatze.  These coefficients indicate that model size makes
a greater impact, as represented byA1 andα1, on V-score for the transformer and RetNet models,
although this preference is not as strong for the transformer. In contrast, model size appears to make
a nearly negligible impact for MADE, and here we should rather focus on increasing training time as
a means of improving performance. The transformer ansatz exhibits scaling behavior that is more
similar to RetNet, preferring an increase in model size to an increase in training time.
Looking now to the coefficients for the absolute error values, we immediately observe that the baseline
coefficientA0 is smaller than the predetermined error tolerance for both MADE and transformer.
This observation alone is not alarming, as all datasets contain several problem instances where the
model achieved the exact tolerance. For the RetNet, a higher baseline coefficient may indicate the
model is fundamentally less accurate than the other two, but such a distinction is not practically
meaningful since the baseline still lies within chemical accuracy. Furthermore, these curves indicate
that model size impacts final accuracy less for the RetNet, so one should focus on increasing training
time; in contrast, it appears more advantageous to increase model size for the transformer.

5.1    FLOP Analysis

In fig.3, we show FLOP estimates, on a logarithmic scale, for each of the entries in our three datasets.
These estimates come from the equations outlined in section4.1, and provide a coarse, yet still
meaningful, understanding of the compute time needed to produce these results. Qualitatively, we
observe for all three ansatze that when controlling for scaled training timeD′, an increase in model
sizeNcorrelates with an increase in compute time, which makes intuitive sense.
Conversely,D′ scales inversely with compute requirements; this observation is also intuitive, since
larger problem sizes and search spaces should obviously correlate with larger compute costs: for a
fixed training time, a larger problem size will generally incur a greater compute cost and lowerD′.
As a result, one may consider the argument thatD′ only serves to predict the V-score and absolute
error values in our data to the extent that smaller problems are easier to learn than larger ones. As a
potential rebuttal, and an indication thatD′ may reveal something more fundamental, we observe in
fig.3for all ansatze that when keeping   N fixed, an increase inD′ appears to first correspond with an


                                                                 8
increase in FLOPs before the general decrease: a similar reversal does not appear in either the V-score
or absolute error data.  This phenomenon indicates that the correlation betweenD′ and FLOPs is
likely weaker than that betweenD′ and our two loss metrics, lending credence to the hypothesis that
D′ is truly a size-agnostic measure of training time.

5.2    Compute Constrained Scaling Analysis

                                  Ansatz         Simplified Training FLOP Estimate
                                  MADE               3MSD    ′N
                                  RetNet                  11315.5Mn+             3n  2dmSD′N

                              TransformerM                      n+   n212d      mSD′N

Table 4: Simplified FLOP estimates for constrained scaling law optimization. These are derived from
the estimates given in table1and are intended to prioritize ease of computation at the expense of a
decrease in accuracy. HereSrefers to the search space size of the NQS problem.


The FLOP estimates in table1, while already ignoring many non-leading contributions, are meant to
reflect the primary contributions of all relevant factors of an NQS training run on compute cost. These
complicated formulas contrast with the simple 6ND   cost formula assumed by [15] for language
modeling, which allows for a simple constrained optimization comparing performance relative to
compute cost. To perform a similar analysis here, we introduce further simplified compute estimates
in table4, with detailed discussion of their derivation in sectionA.5. Future analyses that consider
Nmod andN        ph as separate variables may benefit from the more accurate estimates of table1.

                    D′ =                MADE                   RetNet                  Transformer
                   V-score 0.053×N                          0.516       13.076×N                 3.823          6.707×N               3.354
              Absolute Error0.889×N                        2.938        0.005×N               0.383        2663.825×N                     8.279
Table 5: The empirical coefficients in table3and estimates in table4together define curves tracking
the growth ofD ′, with respect toN, along the efficient frontier determined by compute budgetC.


Derivations made in sectionA.8indicate that, for compute budget estimates of the form    C=kD  ′N
for some problem-definedk, such as those given in table4, the constrained optimization of (10) is
entirely analogous to the process carried out in [12]. Consequently, we give in table5the optimal
growth rate ofD′ as a function ofN, for each loss metric and ansatz considered. These growth rates
are highly metric and ansatz dependent, and more importantly, do not reflect the approximately linear
curves identified in the Chinchilla scaling laws.

6    Conclusion

Our work applies Chinchilla-style LLM scaling laws, incorporating a new training time variable
dependent on problem size, to MADE, transformer, and RetNet NQS ansatze in order to assess their
performance on a selection of quantum chemistry problems of varying size. Using an ablation dataset,
we fit this curve to predict both absolute error and V-score loss metrics for each ansatz.  Together
with a novel framework for estimating the compute cost of NQS, these results demonstrate how the
performance of NQS at scale may be analyzed similarly to LLMs.
This line of research invites a more comprehensive ablation study, with greater variety of architectures,
problem sizes and training setups. For instance, the model sizeN in (10) comprises both modulus
and phase networks, but it may be illuminating to isolate the phase network’s role. Varying the total
number of non-unique Monte Carlo samples may also impact accuracy. A technique introduced in
[29] efficiently approximates local energy calculations by neglecting Hamiltonian terms associated
with unsampled states, and more recent work [19] demonstrates the extent of its potential. Analyzing
the scaling properties of NQS under this new variation would help provide insight into the extent of
its benefits, especially when considering NQS as a problem-agnostic method of dequantization [16].


                                                               9
Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank James Stokes for his feedback throughout the course of this work.

References
 [1]  Thomas D Barrett, Aleksei Malyshev, and AI Lvovsky. Autoregressive neural-network wave-
      functions for ab initio quantum chemistry.Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(4):351–358, 2022.
 [2]  Rodney J Bartlett and Monika Musiał. Coupled-cluster theory in quantum chemistry.Reviews
      of Modern Physics, 79(1):291–352, 2007.
 [3]  Elizabeth Bennewitz, Florian Hopfmueller, Bohdan Kulchytskyy, Juan Carrasquilla, and Pooya
      Ronagh. Neural error mitigation of near-term quantum simulations.Nature Machine Intelligence,
      4(7):618–624, Jul 2022.
 [4]  Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, Matthew Barnett, and Josh You. Chinchilla scaling: A replication
      attempt.arXiv preprint arXiv: 2404.10102, 2024.
 [5]  Max Born and Robert Oppenheimer.  Zur quantentheorie der molekeln.Annalen der Physik,
      389(20):457–484, 1927.
 [6]  Giuseppe Carleo and Matthias Troyer. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial
      neural networks.Science, 355(6325):602–606, 2017.
 [7]  Kenny Choo, Antonio Mezzacapo, and Giuseppe Carleo. Fermionic neural-network states for
      ab-initio electronic structure.Nature Communications, 11(1), May 2020.
 [8]  Yunzhen Feng, Elvis Dohmatob, Pu Yang, Francois Charton, and Julia Kempe.   A tale of
      tails: Model collapse as a change of scaling laws. InICLR 2024 Workshop on Navigating and
      Addressing Data Problems for Foundation Models, 2024.
 [9]  Mathieu Germain, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. Made: Masked autoencoder
      for distribution estimation. InInternational conference on machine learning, pages 881–889.
      PMLR, 2015.
[10]  Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish.   Scaling laws for
      transfer.arXiv journal arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
[11]  Mohamed Hibat-Allah, Estelle M Inack, Roeland Wiersema, Roger G Melko, and Juan Car-
      rasquilla. Variational neural annealing.Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(11):952–961, 2021.
[12]  Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
      Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
      Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia
      Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent
      Sifre.  Training compute-optimal large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556,
      2022.
[13]  Shengding Hu, Yuge Tu, Xu Han, Chaoqun He, Ganqu Cui, Xiang Long, Zhi Zheng, Yewei
      Fang, Yuxiang Huang, Weilin Zhao, Xinrong Zhang, Zheng Leng Thai, Kaihuo Zhang, Chongyi
      Wang, Yuan Yao, Chenyang Zhao, Jie Zhou, Jie Cai, Zhongwu Zhai, Ning Ding, Chao Jia,
      Guoyang Zeng, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Minicpm: Unveiling the potential
      of small language models with scalable training strategies.arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06395,
      2024.
[14]  Berivan Isik, Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Dimitris Paparas, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and
      Sanmi Koyejo. Scaling laws for downstream task performance of large language models.arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2402.04177, 2024.
[15]  Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
      Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei.  Scaling laws for neural language
      models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.


                                                         10
[16]  Oliver Knitter, James Stokes, and Shravan Veerapaneni. Toward neural network simulation of
      variational quantum algorithms.NeurIPS workshop on AI for Science: Progress and Promises,
      2022.
[17]  Oliver Knitter, Dan Zhao, James Stokes, Martin Ganahl, Stefan Leichenauer, and Shravan
      Veerapaneni. Retentive neural quantum states: Efficient ansätze for ab initio quantum chemistry.
      Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2025.
[18]  Sheng-Hsuan Lin and Frank Pollmann.  Scaling of neural-network quantum states for time
      evolution.physica status solidi (b), 259(5):2100172, 2022.
[19]  Aleksei Malyshev, Markus Schmitt, and A. I. Lvovsky.  Neural quantum states and peaked
      molecular wave functions: Curse or blessing?, 2024.
[20]  Sam McArdle, Suguru Endo, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Simon C Benjamin, and Xiao Yuan. Quantum
      computational chemistry.Reviews of Modern Physics, 92(1):015003, 2020.
[21]  Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M. Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus,
      Nouamane Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel.  Scaling data-constrained
      language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16264, 2023.
[22]  Nikhil Sardana, Jacob Portes, Sasha Doubov, and Jonathan Frankle. Beyond chinchilla-optimal:
      Accounting for inference in language model scaling laws. InForty-first International Conference
      on Machine Learning, 2024.
[23]  Ulrich Schollwöck.  The density-matrix renormalization group.Reviews of modern physics,
      77(1):259–315, 2005.
[24]  Or Sharir, Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Giuseppe Carleo, and Amnon Shashua. Deep autoregres-
      sive models for the efficient variational simulation of many-body quantum systems.Physical
      review letters, 124(2):020503, 2020.
[25]  Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, Yuqing Xia, Jilong Xue, Jianyong Wang,
      and Furu Wei. Retentive network: A successor to transformer for large language models.arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2307.08621, 2023.
[26]  Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, William Fedus, Jinfeng Rao,
      Sharan Narang, Vinh Q. Tran, Dani Yogatama, and Donald Metzler.  Scaling laws vs model
      architectures: How does inductive bias influence scaling?  InThe 2023 Conference on Empirical
      Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
[27]  Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
      Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
      S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors,Advances in Neural
      Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[28]  Dian  Wu,  Riccardo  Rossi,  Filippo  Vicentini,  Nikita  Astrakhantsev,  Federico  Becca,  Xi-
      aodong Cao, Juan Carrasquilla, Francesco Ferrari, Antoine Georges, Mohamed Hibat-Allah,
      Masatoshi Imada, Andreas M. Läuchli, Guglielmo Mazzola, Antonio Mezzacapo, Andrew
      Millis, Javier Robledo Moreno, Titus Neupert, Yusuke Nomura, Jannes Nys, Olivier Parcollet,
      Rico Pohle, Imelda Romero, Michael Schmid, J. Maxwell Silvester, Sandro Sorella, Luca F.
      Tocchio, Lei Wang, Steven R. White, Alexander Wietek, Qi Yang, Yiqi Yang, Shiwei Zhang,
      and Giuseppe Carleo.  Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems.Science,
      386(6719):296–301, 2024.
[29]  Yangjun Wu, Chu Guo, Yi Fan, Pengyu Zhou, and Honghui Shang.  Nnqs-transformer:  an
      efficient and scalable neural network quantum states approach for ab initio quantum chemistry.
      InProceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
      Storage and Analysis, pages 1–13, 2023.
[30]  Tianchen Zhao,  James Stokes,  and Shravan Veerapaneni.   Scalable neural quantum states
      architecture for quantum chemistry.Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 4(2):025034,
      jun 2023.


                                                         11
A    Appendix

A.1    The MADE Ansatz

The first ansatz we analyze [30] utilizes MADE [9], a feedforward network designed as an autoencoder
for probability distributions, as the decoder. MADE applies binary masks to its weights, severing
key neural connections between the hidden layers to ensure that its outputs obey the autoregressive
property. MADE does not require any feature embedding or positional encoding of the input spins,
and is the simplest of the three architectures being examined. MADE was not the first autoregressive
ansatz applied to electronic ground state calculations,  but it serves as a precursor for the more
sophisticated architectures discussed.
FLOP estimates for a MADE network are simple: a feedforward network withN parameters requires
approximately 2N   FLOPs to perform a forward pass on a single spin configuration, since most model
weights correspond with one multiplication and one addition operation inside each forward pass;
biases only correspond with one addition operation, but are heavily outnumbered among the total
parameter count. We ignore the contribution of nonlinearities to the compute cost, alongside other
non-leading FLOP contributions, throughout this work. These count estimates hold true for a MADE
network, but the binary masking of model weights introduces an additional FLOP for each weight, so
MADE requires3NFLOPs to perform a forward pass on a single spin configuration.

A.2    NQS–Transformer

The transformer is a ubiquitous architecture that underpins many large language models. They process
input sequences in parallel and generate autoregressive output, making them well-suited to learn the
conditional probabilities of an NQS ansatz [3, 29]. Each transformer block comprises an attention
block and a feedforward layer, interspersed with residual connections and layer normalizations.
Attention forms the the key input processing apparatus, calculating a weighted context vector for
each input token based on all pairwise contextual relationships within the input sequence. Tokens are
embedded based on value and relative position, then projected to obtain batches of query, key, and
value vectors, which are used to construct the context vectors:
                                       QKT
     Attention(X) = softmax               √dk       V, whereQ=XW        Q, K=XW   K, V=XW   V        (11)

Attention can easily learn correlations between tokens separated by significant relative distance,
and a transformer typically utilizes several attention heads simultaneously—known asmulti-head
attention—to learn different types of contextual information [              27]. Appropriate input masking during
training and inference makes attention autoregressive. Being so naturally expressive, transformers
have been shown to perform well as NQS ansatze [29]. In this context, the transformer operates on
input sequences of spatial orbital occupancies. Each spatial orbital can contain two electrons, so these
sequences have lengthn/2for ann-qubit NQS problem.
FLOP estimates [15] indicate that for a transformer withN total parameters,nb blocks, and attention
dimensiondattn, a forward pass acrossnseq tokens requires approximately 2N+4n          bnseqdattn operations
per token.  FLOP estimates made for LLMs typically truncate this value to 2N  , but for NQS, the
typically smaller ratio of model-to-problem size, coupled with the need for multiple forward passes
to generate local energy values, necessitates considering the full FLOP estimate [16]. We emphasize
here that the presence ofn     seq inside this estimate implies that the transformer requiresO(n                    2seq)time
to perform a forward pass an entire sequence.

A.3    RetNet NQS

The Retentive Network (RetNet) is a recurrent language model that compresses into an equivalent
parallel form [25], which processes inputs and calculate gradients through backpropagation similarly
to transformers. In this format, the RetNet block is essentially analogous to the transformer, except
that multi-head attention is replaced by multi-scale retention, which compresses the repeated action
of a linear recurrent model onto the embedded inputs:
  Retention(X) =     QKT⊙D V, whereQ= (XW       Q)⊙Θ, K= (XW      K)⊙                              Θ, V=XW    V.
                                                                                                                      (12)


                                                            12
Under retention, embedded tokens are still projected to queries, keys, and values, but the retention head
itself encodes relative positional information Θ, along with applying its own weighted autoregressive
maskD. These matrices are defined by                                  γj−k  ,  j≥k

                                        Θj =e ijθ,  Djk =              0,    j <k ,                                         (13)

whereθ is a real parameter vector andγ is a positive scalar. Different retention heads have different,
fixedγ values to capture different types of contextual information. Consequently, retention heads
are followed by group, not layer, normalization.  RetNets train in parallel form but they perform
retention recurrently during inference. TakingQ,K, andV  as in (12), retention can be expressed as
a recurrence on the rows of these three matrices:
                                            St =γS t−1    + (K n)TVt, S0 = 0
                                            Retention(X    t) =Q tSt                                                             (14)

Thus RetNets perform inference inO(n       seq) time, unlike the transformer’sO(n     2seq).  For a RetNet
with 2N   total parameters,nb decoder blocks, retention dimensiondattn, and sequence lengthnseq, the
parallel RetNet requires 2N+ 4n          bnsecdattn operations per token—same as transformer—to perform
a forward pass.   Recurrent RetNet,  in contrast,  requires 2N+ 5n          b(d  attn)2  operations per token
[17].  While RetNet contains a few more parameters than an equivalent transformer, these results
indicate that a recurrent RetNet scales more favorably for problems wherenseq >1.75d               attn. Though
fundamentally less expressive than transformers, RetNets have shown comparable performance on
key language modeling baselines [25]. Since NQS training incorporates output from multiple training
and inference forward passes, its computational cost is dominated by these forward passes: the dual
form of the RetNet makes it useful for improving compute efficiency of NQS, and RetNet ansatze are
amenable to solving electronic ground state problems [17].

A.4    Deriving FLOP Estimates for MADE, RetNet, and Transformer Ansätze

Following the principles of estimation outlined in section4.1, we now derive the different total FLOP
count estimates shown in table1. The MADE ansatz is simple to estimate, since it requires a full
forward pass through the entire input sequence at all stages of training. Its FLOP estimate is given by

                              ⌊log  4B⌋−1X                n                    
  FLOPM≈3N       modT                        4m +B          2−⌊log  4B⌋          +BT((M+ 3)(3N                            mod + 2N   ph))

                                    m=0
                               B            n
              ≈3N       modT     3  +B        2−logB             +BT((3M+ 9)(N                            mod + 2(M+ 3)N                ph))
                          3n+ 2
              ≈BT                2     + 3M+ 9−3 logB                  Nmod + 2(M+ 3)N                ph.                          (15)

We now proceed with RetNets, as in contrast with transformers, calculating the total FLOP estimate
remains relatively straightforward: we use the recurrent form of RetNet for (7) and theMpasses in
(8), and the parallel form for the rest, which gives us

                                1
          FLOPR≈BT                3−log(B) +        (M+ 1)n2            Frec +BT         (M+ 3)F             ph + 3n2 Fpar
                                 2N   mod + 5d  2mnb (M+ 1)n
                     ≈BT                                            2  −log(B)

                         +BT((2 (M+ 3)N                     ph + 3n(N         mod +nd    mnb)))
                     ≈BT(((M+ 4)n−2 logB)N                                               mod + 2(M+ 3)N                ph)
                         +BT  nbdm 2.5d       m ((M+ 1)n−2 logB) + 3n                              2.                                  (16)

Estimating the FLOPs of the transformer ansatz requires consideration of a few different factors. The
contribution of the phase network remains unchanged, but unlike RetNets,Fmod implicitly depends


                                                                 13
onn during sampling, though we may mitigate this effect to an extent by excluding dummy tokens
from forward passes. In this case, we must make adjustments to the expression of (7) and get

                     ⌊log  4B⌋−1X                                                           n/2X                            
 FLOPS(T)≈T                       (m+ 1)4  m (2N     mod + 4(m+ 1)n               bdm) +B        (2N     mod + 4mn   bdm)
                            m=0                                                       m=⌊log          4B⌋+1
                             ⌊log  4B⌋−1X                     ⌊log  4B⌋X       
               ≈T    2N   mod         (m+ 1)4  m +n    bdm            m24m

                                 m=0                             m=1
                                                                                  
                                                                        n/2X
                  +T    BNmod (n−2 logB) + 4Bn                         bdm  m     

                                                                 m=⌊log          4B⌋+1
                                                                         n2
               ≈BT          n−   43 logB−         29  Nmod +n    bdm        2  + 2027− 89 logB−         23 (logB)           2  .
                                                                                                                           (17)

Estimating the loss count gives

                FLOPL(T)≈BT  (M+ 3)nN             mod + 2(M+ 3)N                ph +n    bdm(M+ 3)n          2,             (18)
and through combining these two estimates, we obtain the transformer FLOP count estimate


                  FLOPT≈BT                 (M+ 4)n−            43 logB    Nmod + 2 (M+ 3)N             ph

                                 +BT        nbdm      (M+ 3.5)n              2− 89 logB−         23 (logB)           2  .               (19)


A.5    Derivation of Simplified FLOP Estimates

We now describe the simplification process yielding the rougher FLOP estimates given in table4.
Traditional LLM compute-constrained scaling law analysis presumes an approximate FLOP count of
6ND   [15], whereN is the model parameter count andD is the number of tokens used from training.
This estimate is quite rough, based on the presumption that while the single-token forward pass FLOP
count of a transformer is technically greater than2N, this difference is not significant in practice.
The NQS FLOP estimates in table1are far more elaborate, incorporating several additional terms
that dependent on problem size—the qubit numbern, numberM of unique bit flip patterns within the
terms of the Hamiltonian, which is roughlyO(n     4), and the sample batch sizeB. Furthermore, these
formulas do not yet explicitly depend onN andD′, the variables used in the NQS parametric scaling
law curve from section4.2. Accordingly, we must modify the NQS FLOP estimates both to depend
on these two variables explicitly and to be more amenable to the simple constrained optimization
performed in scaling law analysis.  We give a detailed description for modifying the Transformer
ansatz FLOP estimate, but those for RetNet and MADE follow similar principles.
Drawing inspiration from the general principles that lead to the 6ND   estimate in [15], we first remove
all remaining non-leading terms in (19). We also remove all terms dependent on      logB     , sinceB is
bounded above by the size of the search space:  the discussion of search space size in section4.2
and a basic asymptotic analysis of binomial coefficients based on Stirling’s approximation together
indicate that logB      isO(n)       , hence it is not one of the primary leading terms in the estimate. We then
have a reduced estimate
                            FLOPT≈BT  nMNmod + 2MN   ph +n    bdm Mn2.                           (20)
Looking back to [15], under the model constraints enforced in section4.3,       Nmod≈12n          bd2m, simplify-
ing (20) further to

                             FLOPT≈BT               M     n+  n212d      mNmod + 2MN   ph         .                             (21)


                                                              14
Figure 4: Heat maps showing V-score and absolute error for the MADE ansatz. We note that data
points are far less stratified than in fig.2


If we letS equal the size of the search space defined by the given NQS problem, and permit ourselves
some further overestimate of the FLOP contribution from the phase network, then our reduced FLOP
estimate becomes
                                       FLOPT≈M             n+  n212d      mSD′N.                                           (22)

A similar simplification process results in the other entries of table4.

A.6    Brief Overview of Chinchilla Parametric Curve Fitting

A crucial aspect of assessing a model’s performance with the Chinchilla scaling law analysis [12]
involves fitting a parametric curve to a collection of data points representing separate training runs of
the model: the curve predicts the final training loss valueL attained by each instance as a function
of model sizeN and number of tokensD processed by the model over the course of training. The
contribution of each variable to the final loss is given via a power law functional form:


                                         L(N,D) =A            0 + A1Nα1  + A2Dα2,                                              (23)

with the final curve being determined through minimizing a Huber loss, taken withδ= 10 −3   , applied
to the logarithms of the power law and target loss values and averaged across the entire dataset:
                             X                                                !                        !
                   minAi,αi1      Huberδ       log    A0 + A1                    −logL(N      j,Dj)                    (24)
                         R   j∈R                              Nα1j    + A2Dα2j

Though the exact values of these regression parameters have been disputed [4] since the unveiling of
the Chinchilla laws, the laws themselves remain a crucial foundation for scaling analysis in LLMs.

A.7    MADE and RetNet Result Discussion

We show in fig.4the equivalent heat maps for the MADE ansatz to those of the transformer from
fig.2. Observing that these data points are less stratified with respect to model size as can be seen
for tranformer and RetNet, we emphasize here that the exact values ofN come from both problem
size and hidden layer dimension.  This observation is technically true for all models discussed in
this paper, but the effect is far less visible for the other models, which do not solely consists of
feedforward components.  The number of hidden layers was deliberately kept fixed and shallow
to avoid introducing further sources of error as a result of the specified training hyperparameter
configuration being insufficient to handle deeper networks. We do this during testing not only for
both networks inside the MADE ansatz, but also for the phase networks, which are feedforward
networks, of the RetNet and transformer ansatze.
In contrast, the data distribution shown in fig.5for the RetNet ansatz is almost identical to what can
be seen in fig.2, owing to the fact that RetNets and transformers are so architecturally similar. Of
course, the exact V scores and absolute errors attained differ between the two models, but the general
trends here corroborate the conclusion from [17] that the two models also train quite similarly as
NQS ansatze.  We can make a few additional general qualitative observations about the observed


                                                            15
Figure 5: Heat maps showing V-score and absolute error values for the RetNet-based ansatz. We do
note that the distribution of data points is more directly similar to fig.2than to what is shown in fig.4.


data. For instance, it appears that, on average, a given combination of independent variablesN and
D′ will yield a lower V-score with a RetNet ansatz than with a transformer, but at the same time,
the transformer appears more likely to produce a lower absolute error than the RetNet.  A similar
comparison between the scaling performance of these architectures and the MADE ansatz is more
difficult to make since MADE is a fundamentally different model, but one can observe in the data
that RetNet and transformer ansatze show better performance, in terms of both V-score and absolute
error, than the MADE ansatz using lower numbers of parameters.

A.8    Analysis of Compute-Constrained Scaling

Here we give, in moderate detail, the derivation of the efficient frontier obtained in [12], slightly
modified for our purposes.  Each of the FLOP estimates in table4is of the form    kD′N, for some
k specific to the choice of ansatz and the exact problem size. This allows for a similar constrained
optimization  to  [12],  allowing  us  to  determine  from  the  empirically  obtained  parametric  curve
constants the optimal training configuration relative to a fixed compute cost. Both parametric curves
in (10) take the form
                                         L(N,D ′) =A    0 + A1Nα1  + A2D′α 2                                               (25)
for some loss functionL.  The method of Lagrange multipliers then says that for a fixed compute
budgetC, we must solve the system of equations
                                                α1A1Nα1−1   =λkD ′
                                               α2A2D′α 2−1   =λkN
                                                        kD′N=C.

SubstitutingD      ′ = CkN  into the other two equations gives
                                                α1A1Nα1 =λC
                                             α2A2Cα2−1   =λk  α2Nα2,


and substituting the first equation into the second then gives
                                                                        α2A2       1α1+α   2 C      α2α1+α   2              (26)
               α2A2Cα2 =α    1A1kα2Nα1+α    2, henceN=                    α1A1                 k

Likewise, substitutingN=            CkD′  into the second equation givesα    2A2D′α 2 =λC, so
                                  α1A1              1       α1A1            1           α1
                                                    α2  =               α1+α   2 C      α1+α   2 .                          (27)
                          D′ =      α2A2Nα1                   α2A2                 k

These equations for the compute-optimalNandD           ′ are clear analogs of those found in [12].





                                                            16