Simultaneous approximation of multiple degenerate
states using a single neural network quantum state

                  Waleed Sherif
                  Institute for Quantum Gravity, Department of Physics,
                  Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg (FAU), Staudtstraße 7, 91058
                  Erlangen, Germany
                  E-mail:  waleed.sherif@gravity.fau.de

                  September 4, 2025

                  Abstract.    Neural  network  quantum  states  (NQS)  excel  at  approximating  ground
                  states of quantum many-body systems, but approximating all states of a degenerate
                  manifold is nevertheless computationally expensive.  We propose a single-trunk multi-
                  head (ST-MH) NQS ensemble that share a feature extracting trunk while attaching
                  lightweight  heads  for  each  target  state.    Using  a  cost  function  which  also  has  an
                  orthogonality term, we derive exact analytic gradients and overlap derivatives needed
                  to train ST-MH within standard variational Monte Carlo (VMC) workflows.  We prove
                  that ST-MH can represent every degenerate eigenstate exactly whenever the feature
                  map  of  latent  width h,  augmented  with  a  constant,  has  column  space  containing
                  the linear span of the targets’ log-moduli and (chosen) phase branches together with
                  the constant on the common support where all states are non-vanishing.  Under this
                  condition, ST-MH reduces the parameter count and can reduce the leading VMC cost
                  by a factor equal to the degeneracy K relative to other algorithms when K is modest
                  and in trunk dominated regimes.  As a numerical proof-of-principle, we validate and
                  benchmark the ST-MH approach on the frustrated spin- 12 J1 −J2  Heisenberg model
                  at the Majumdar-Ghosh point on periodic ring lattices of up to 8 sites.  By obtaining
                  the  momentum  eigenstates,  we  demonstrate  that  ST-MH  attains  high  fidelity  and
                  energy  accuracy  across  degenerate  ground  state  manifolds  while  using  significantly
                  lower computing resources.  Lastly we provide a qualitative computational cost analysis
                  which incentivise the applicability of the ST-MH ensemble under certain criteria on
                  the latent width.



1.  Introduction

In quantum many-body physics, the ground state of a system holds central significance.
It  encodes  the  fundamental  properties  of  the  system  at  zero  temperature  and  deter-
mines phase behaviour, correlation structure, and, in combination with excited states,
response functions.  For strongly interacting systems, exact solutions are typically un-
available  and  one  often relies  on  stochastic  methods.  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  (QMC)
methods [1–4] are regarded as highly accurate and widely used to approximate ground
states numerically.  Among them, variational Monte Carlo (VMC) [4] provides a robust
                                                                                                           2

framework in which one parametrises the wave-function using some variational ansatz
and then optimises its parameters to minimise the expectation value of the Hamiltonian.

Among the host of variational Ans¨atze [5–15], neural network quantum states (NQS) [16]
have emerged as a powerful ansatz for this problem, specifically for strongly correlated
quantum systems.  They are capable of representing volume-law entangled states [17–21]
and consequently have been successfully applied to a broad spectrum of quantum sys-
tems,  from  lattice  models  [16, 22, 23],  fermionic  systems  [24, 25],  bosonic  field  theo-
ries [26–28], where conventional methods often struggle due to the sign problem [29,30]
or limited representational flexibility, and recently even in loop quantum gravity [31,32].
Aside from excited states applications, one typical use-case is focused on learning a sin-
gle eigenstate, namely the non-degenerate ground state of the system.

In  the  case  of  degenerate  (ground)  spaces,  the  most  naive  manner  to  obtain  multi-
ple degenerate states is to optimise independent networks for each target state.  This
is both computationally expensive and susceptible to convergence toward redundant or
non-orthogonal solutions, especially when degeneracies arise from symmetries or frus-
tration.  This led to the development of several general methods [33–38] in the context
of VMC to overcome such issues.

A state-averaging approach has been used to simultaneously optimise a set of ground
and excited states, where a common set of orbitals and Jastrow are used to construct all
the states [39].  Recently, a general strategy to address this problem has been put forth
whereby one uses an ensemble-based learning process [38].  In it, each of the K-many
degenerate states is represented by a separate copy of the used variational ansatz, each
with its own set of parameters.  This setup naturally supports orthogonalisation, as the
cost function is modified to include an overlap and orthogonality penalty term [38].  In
the neural network context, this corresponds to having K  independent networks.  The
cost of this K-duplications of the network entails a significant increase in the total pa-
rameter count.  In the context of NQS, since parameter updates occur after computing
gradients of the cost function with respect to the parameters, one very quickly is met
with a computational bottleneck which may severely limit scalability.

Perhaps  a  bit  more  distant  to  the  problem  of  finding  ground  states,  there  is  a  grow-
ing class of efficient physics machine learning (ML) algorithms that learn multiple re-
lated quantities from a shared representation with light, task-specific outputs.  Notably,
multi-head physics informed neural networks [40–42] such as L-HYDRA [42] employ a
single non-linear “body” with several linear heads to address families of partial differen-
tial equation tasks, and multi-state neural models in quantum chemistry predict several
state energies and couplings from a common latent space [43].

In this work,  motivated by multi-task learning in classical ML, by these physics ana-
                                                                                                            3

logues,  and  by  the  shared-orbitals/Jastrow  practice  [39],  we  propose  an  efficient  en-
semble  approach  when  utilising  NQS  for  approximating  degenerate  ground  states:  a
single-trunk multi-head (ST-MH) ensemble,  whereby one network is used to approxi-
mate K-many degenerate states.

This   approach   retains   a   single   shared   feature-extracting   trunk   while   appending
lightweight,  linearly  parametrised  heads  for  each  target  eigenstate.   We  demonstrate
that  this  construction  is  not  merely  a  heuristic  compression  but  that,  under  precise
conditions on the trunk’s width, it can represent the entire degenerate manifold exactly.
Specifically, if the latent width h of the shared trunk satisfies h+ 1 ≥rboth, where rboth
is the combined linear rank of the states’ log-moduli and phases on a common support
in the degenerate target manifold where the states are non-vanishing (see Appendix A,
Definition A.1), then all degenerate eigenstates can be captured without loss of expres-
sivity.  Furthermore, we derive closed form analytic gradients for the energy and overlap
penalties as well as sampling strategies, enabling integration into standard VMC work-
flows.

We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed NQS ensemble approach by obtaining
the degenerate momentum eigenstates of the frustrated spin- 12 J1−J2 Heisenberg chain
on a periodic ring with even sites at the Majumdar-Ghosh point [44–46].  Across various
metrics, including fidelity, orthogonality, memory and runtime footprint, we show that
the ST-MH NQS ensemble achieves comparable accuracy all the meanwhile maintain-
ing  a  substantially  lower  resource  demand.   We  also  provide  a  qualitative  analysis  of
the gained efficiency in compute cost when using the ST-MH NQS ensemble and spec-
ify  a  qualitative  threshold  which  takes  into  account  both K  and  the  trunk  width  to
obtain such efficiency.  This offers a qualitative threshold regarding the applicability of
this proposed approach based on the number of target states.  The conclusion made is
therefore that the proposed ensemble approach offers a principled and practical route
to learning degenerate eigenspaces efficiently, when optimising using the penalty based
cost method, provided that the linear rank conditionrboth ≤h+1 is satisfied and that the
phase functions admit single-valued branches that can be represented as affine functions
of the shared trunk features (mod 2π).

2.  NQS Ensembles

The goal of variational Monte Carlo is to iteratively optimise some ansatz wave-function
to approximate a ground state [4].  In this work, we will focus on approximating several
ground states and the chosen variational ansatz is the neural network quantum state
ansatz.  In the non-degenerate ground space case, VMC optimisation aims to minimise
the cost function
                                            C ∶= ⟨Ψθ, ˆHΨθ⟩⟨Ψθ, Ψθ⟩ ,                                                   (1)
                                                                                                            4

where  ˆH  is the (Hermitian) Hamiltonian of the quantum many-body system at hand
and θ  are  the  variational  parameters  of  the  ansatz.   Equation  (1)  is  interchangeably
denoted the name Energy.  We begin by rewriting the NQS ansatz to isolate the linear
and non-linear features.  For a spin configuration S = {σzj =±1}Nj=1, standard expression
in the literature for the trial wave-function Ψθ being a NQS with a Restricted Boltzmann
machine (RBM) architecture is [16]

                                              N            L          L  N
                     ψRBM(S)= ∑               ∑           ∑          ∑  ∑
                                   {hi} exp[j=1ajσzj +    i=1bihi+   i=1j=1Wijhiσzj],                      (2)

where here hi ∈ {±1} is a set of L hidden spin variables.  Since the RBM does not offer
any intra-layer interactions, then [16]

                            L          L   N                 L                 N
                 ∑          ∑          ∑  ∑                 ∏                 ∑
                 {hi} exp[i=1bihi+     i=1j=1Wijhiσzj]=     i=1 2 cosh(bi+    j=1Wijσzj),                 (3)

allowing us to write ψRBM as

                                                       L                 N
                       ψRBM(S)= exp[∑                 ∏                 ∑
                                            j ajσzj]  i=1 2 cosh(bi+    j=1Wijσzj).                        (4)
or alternatively, in logarithmic form as [16]

                                     N           L                     N
                       lnψRBM =     ∑           ∑                     ∑
                                    j=1ajσzj +  i=1 ln(2 cosh(bi+     j=1Wijσzj)).                         (5)
For simplicity, define a real feature vector

                                            N                                 N
   fϑ(S)= (σz1,⋯,σzN, ln 2 cosh(b1+        ∑                                  ∑
                                           j=1W1jσzj),⋯, ln 2 cosh(bL+        j=1WLjσzj))⊺ ∈ Rh×1,    (6)
where h=N +L‡.  Now, define the linear head

                                   α= (a1,⋯,aN, 1, 1,⋯, 1)∈ R1×h.                                       (7)

This allows us to then write ψRBM as

                      lnψRBM(S)=α⋅fϑ(S) /Leftr⫯g⊸tl⫯ne⇒ψRBM = exp[α⋅fϑ(S)]                        (8)

Note that in the equation above, in general one may have a +β term in the exponential.
In what follows, we will denote by fϑ  the “trunk” (non-linear features) and by (α,β)
the linear head parameters.  Now for any architecture, if the trunk is real valued, one
can generally write

                         ψθ(x)= exp[α⋅fθt(x)+β] exp[iφ⋅fθt(x)+ iγ],                           (9)

‡  Note that we will use the notation R1×N  and RN×1  to make it explicit that we are using “row” or
“column” vectors, respectively, in RN.
                                                                                                             5

where θ ∶= (θt,α,φ,β,γ) are the free parameters.  Here, α,φ ∈ R1×h  and β,γ ∈ R.  The
trunkfθt is simply a map from the configuration space to some Rh×1 fθt ∶ C→ Rh×1 with
trunk parameters denoted by θt (t for trunk).  Generally, one may allow for a complex
valued  trunk  or  even  allow  for  two  independent  trunks  for  the  phase  and  amplitude
parts  of  the  ansatz,  but  we  will  continue  with  such  a  common  real  valued  trunk  for
simplicity.  In this case, the number of heads is one (number of linear readout layers,
or equivalently the number of amplitudes produced by a given fθt).  Given that there is
also one trunk only, we denote this approach as a single-trunk single-head (ST-SH) class.

Standard VMC methods would then update the free parameters of the network such that
the cost is minimised.  This is done efficiently by using local estimators such that [47,48]

                                          E =∑
                                                 x pθ(x)Eloc(x),                                              (10)
where
                        pθ(x)∶=  ∣ψθ(x)∣2                                ˆHxyψθ(y)
                                   ∑y ∣ψθ(y)∣2  ,  Eloc(x)∶=∑y                ψθ(x),                        (11)
are the Born probability and the local estimator of  ˆH respectively.  The gradients of the
energy can be shown to be [47,48]

                              ∂θiE = 2R[⟨(Oiθ−⟨Oiθ⟩)∗(Eloc−⟨ ˆH⟩θ)⟩],                               (12)

where Oiθ(x)∶=∂θi lnψθ(x), with i = 1,⋯,P , is the log derivative, where P  is the total
number  of  free  variational  parameters.   Once  computed,  the  network  parameters  are
updated using some descent method until a minimum for C is reached.

2.1.  Approximating multiple-states
One naive way to use this standard VMC prescription outlined above to obtain all D
ground  states  in  a  degenerate  system  would  require  (at  best)  running D  simulations
with different seeds.  Even then,  there is no guarantee that two obtained states from
two independent simulations are different eigenstates.  Thus, this sequential approach of
training several ST-SH trial NQS wave-functions independently is not the most suitable
for degenerate systems.

Accordingly,  among  different  algorithms  it  was  proposed  to  consider  an  ensemble  of
K  many  arbitrary  trial  wave-functions  and  to  modify  the  cost  function  to  include  a
penalty  term  that  enforces  orthogonality  [38].   In  the  language  of  NQS,  this  would
mean that one hasK-many heads (amplitudes) each arising from equally K-many trial
wave-functions, each with their own trunk (e.g. K-many independent networks for each
target state).  For uniformity, we denote this proposed approach in the current context
as a  multi-trunk  multi-head  (MT-MH) ensemble.  In that context, the single states in
                                                                                                           6

equation (9) are labelled byk = 1,⋯,K and thus thekth amplitude is obtained from the
kth NQS via
                     ψπk(x)= exp[αk⋅fθtk(x)+βk] exp[iφk⋅fθtk(x)+ iγk].                     (13)
where πk  is the set of all variational parameters (αk,βk,φk,γk,θtk) for the target state
k which form a disjoint vector πk ∈ RPk  and hence and the total parameter set for the
ensemble is Θ = (π1,⋯,πK) ∈ RPtot.  Note that here, θtk  does not denote the kth  trunk
parameter, but rather the parameters ofkth trunk. The cost function (1) then is modified
to include an additional overlap and orthogonality penalty term P  such that [38]

                                          P(Θ)∶= 1         ∣Σkl∣2
                                                     2∑k≠l NkNl,                                               (14)

whereby P = 0  iff  the  normalised  states  are  orthonormal.   Here,  Σkl(Θ) ∶= ⟨ψπk,ψπl⟩
define the overlaps and Nk ∶= Σkk.

For some weights wk such that∑kwk = 1, the total ensemble cost is then

                                           K
                               C(Θ)∶=     ∑        ⟨ψπk,ψπk⟩ +λP(Θ),                                  (15)
                                          k=1wk⟨ψπk, ˆHψπk⟩
whereλ> 0 is the penalty strength.  This modification of the cost ensures that, for care-
fully chosen weights and penalty factor, one obtains K many solutions which minimise
the energy but are also mutually orthogonal.  One can then obtain expressions for the
gradients of this cost function using standard methods.

The MT-MH NQS ensemble training, while successful in obtaining K  eigenstates from
a degenerate lowest energy eigenspace, has a rather large computational footprint.  We
now propose an ensemble approach whereby we consider one NQS with K-many linear
read-outs, each targeting one of the K  degenerate eigenstates.  As the read-outs share
the same trunk, we therefore denote this as a single-trunk multi-head (ST-MH) ensemble.

Consider  now  a  shared  trunk fϑ ∶ C → Rh×1  with  parameters ϑ ∈ RT  where T  is
the  number  of  trunk  parameters.    For  each  head k,  one  has  the  head  parameters
θ(h)k  ∶= (αk,φk,βk,γk) ∈ RPH  with,  as  usual, αk,φk ∈ R1×h,βk,γk ∈ R.   The  set  of  all
ensemble parameters is then Θ∶= (ϑ,θ(h)1 ,⋯,θ(h)K )∈ RPT+KPH.  The kth target eigenstate
can be obtained from the head k simply by

                      ψπk(x)= exp[αk⋅fϑ(x)+βk] exp[iφk⋅fϑ(x)+ iγk],                      (16)

where now πk = (θ(h)k ,ϑ), which can be written in the compact form

                                    ψk(x)= exp[χk⋅fϑ(x)+ck],                                        (17)

where χk ∶= αk+ iφk ∈ C1×h  and ck ∶= βk+ iγk ∈ C.  It can be shown (see Appendix B)
that one can obtain consistent expressions for the gradients of a cost function similar to
                                                                                                           7

(15) enforcing the same penalty term P  (see Appendix B).

For  the  case  of  degenerate  eigenspaces,  one  can  (see  Appendix  A)  associate  to  any
set of orthonormal eigenstates a linear modulus span RG (span of all target log-moduli
on a common support S  where the target states have a positive modulus) whose dimen-
sionrG = dimRG we call the linear modulus rank  of the degenerate manifold.  Similarly
for the phases, one can define the linear phase span RΩ (also on their common support)
whose dimensionrΩ = dimRΩ we call the linear phase rank  of the degenerate manifold.
This enables us to define a combined rankrboth = dim span(RG∪RΩ) which is the com-
bined linear  rank  of the states’ log-moduli and phases on the common support in the
degenerate target manifold.

As  shown  in  Theorem  A.1  (Appendix  A),  the  representational  capacity  of  a  ST-MH
NQS ensemble is governed precisely by this rank.  If rboth ≤h+ 1, where h is the latent
width of the shared trunk and rboth  is computed from the chosen single-valued phase
branches on S , then the ST-MH ensemble has the capacity to exactly represent all D
degenerate eigenstates on S .  Conversely, if rboth >h+ 1, then no single trunk of width
h suffices to represent the entire degenerate manifold.  As such, using the orthogonal-
ity penalty outlined above, one can use a single NQS wave-function which has D-many
lightweight linear-heads to obtain allD-many degenerate ground states, instead of using
D-many independent NQS wave-functions, when the criterion above is met.

2.2.  Numerical proof of principle
To  demonstrate  the  applicability  of  the  ST-MH  NQS  ensemble,   we  compare  its
performance to that of the MT-MH ensemble and further demonstrate true full ground
space  resolution.    We  first  present  the  model  which  we  will  consider  in  this  work,
described  in  Section  2.2.1.    Next,  we  provide  a  numerical  proof  of  principle  which
is  performed  over  two  steps  in  Sections  2.2.2  and  2.2.3,  the  first  of  which  is  a
computational efficiency comparison between the two ensemble approaches.  The second
is the verification of the true full ground space resolution of the considered model.

2.2.1.  Physical model
We  select  a  model  which  conforms  to  the  bounds  of  the  Theorem  A.1  and  its
requirements, namely the frustrated spin- 12 J1−J2 Heisenberg chain on a periodic ring
with even N  sites defined by the Hamiltonian

                                          N                   N
                                  ˆH =J1  ∑   ⃗Sj⋅ ⃗Sj+1+J2  ∑   ⃗Sj⋅ ⃗Sj+2,                                    (18)
                                          j=1                j=1

where ⃗Sj = (Sxj,Syj,Szj)  and ⃗S2j = 3/4  and  the  site  indices  are  understood  modulo N.
Throughout, we work in a fixed Sz  sector.  For even N, the ground space then lies in
Sztot = 0 whose computational basis is of ( NN/2) dimensions.
                                                                                                                 8


At  the  Majumdar-Ghosh  (MG)  point J2 = J1/2  [44–46],  the  model  admits  an  exact
solution.  Introducing 3-site total spin operators ⃗τj = ⃗Sj + ⃗Sj+1+ ⃗Sj+2, one can see that
summing the direct expansion of ⃗τ 2 overj on the ring counts each on-site Casimir three
times:  each nearest-neighbour pair four times (each nearest-neighbour pair belongs to
two  adjacent  triples  and,  in  each,  enters  with  the  cross-term  prefactor  2,  yielding  an
overall factor of 4) and each next-nearest neighbour pair twice.  Inserting that into (18),
at the MG point this yields the positive-semidefinite representation

                                                        N
                                          ˆHMG = J14   ∑          16 N.                                           (19)
                                                       j=1⃗τ 2j − 9J1

Equivalently,  one  can  decompose  each  triple  into Stot =   12, 32  sectors.    Since ⃗τ 2j =
3/4+ 3Π(3/2)j      where Π(3/2)j      being the projector onto total spin  32  on (j,j+ 1,j+ 2), one
can write                             N
                       ˆHMG = 3J1    ∑     j   − 3J1                 j   = 1
                                 4   j=1 Π(3/2)      8 N  ,    Π(3/2)        3 (⃗τ 2j − 34).                    (20)
Hence, the ground energy is bounded from below by−3J1N/8, with equality iff the state
lies in the kernel of every Π(3/2)j     .

The  two  exact  ground  states  are  obtained  as  period-2  products  of  nearest  neighbour
singlets.  Writing
                                   ∣si,i+1⟩=   1√2 (∣↑i ↓i+1⟩−∣↓i ↑i+1⟩),                                    (21)

with Szi ∣↑i⟩= 1/2∣↑i⟩,Szi ∣↓i⟩=−1/2∣↓i⟩, one can then define

                                   N/2                                N/2
                          ∣ΦA⟩=     ⊗                                 ⊗
                                   m=1∣s2m−1,2m⟩  ,   ∣ΦB⟩=          m=1∣s2m,2m+1⟩.                         (22)
Each 3-site block (j,j+ 1,j+ 2) inside either product contains exactly one singlet bond
together with a decoupled spin- 12, hence its total spin is Stot =  12  and Π(3/2)j    ∣ΦA/B⟩ = 0
for all j.  Consequently,

                        ˆHMG∣ΦA/B⟩=−3J18 N ∣ΦA/B⟩  ,  E0(N)=−3J18 N,                      (23)

and  thus  the  two  states  saturate  the  lower  bound  in  equation  (20).   Translations  by
one  site,  ˆT ⃗Sj ˆT † = ⃗Sj+1,  exchanges  two  coverings  ( ˆT ∣ΦA⟩ = ∣ΦB⟩  and  ˆT ∣ΦB⟩ = ∣ΦA⟩).
On  the  periodic  ring  the  ground  manifold  is  thus  the  2-dimensional  subspace G =
span{∣ΦA⟩,∣ΦB⟩}, and it is natural to resolve it into crystal-momenta eigenstates.  The
one-site  translation  restricted  to G  has  eigenvalues ±1.   One  can  choose  normalised
representatives as

                        ∣Ψk±⟩=    ∣ΦA⟩±∣ΦB⟩√2(1±⟨ΦB∣ΦA⟩)  ,     ˆT ∣Ψk±⟩=eik± ∣Ψk±⟩,                       (24)
                                                                                                           9

with k+ =  0,k− = π.    For  even N,  the  overlap  of  the  two  coverings  is  elementary,
⟨ΦB∣ΦA⟩ = (−1)N/221−N/2,  thus  the  normalisation  above  is  explicit.   Both ∣ΦA/B⟩,  and
hence ∣Ψk±⟩, are total-spin singlets and belong to the Sztot = 0 sector.

From the support point of view, one can in the computational basis label states such
that ∣s⟩ = ∣s1⋯sN⟩ denotes the Sz-product states with sj ∈ {↓,↑} and Sztot = 0.  One can
see that suppΦA and suppΦB each has a cardinality of 2N/2.  One either support, the am-
plitudes have flat modulus 2−N/4 (a product of 1/√2 per singlet) and bond-dependent
phases  determined  by  the  singlet  orientations.   Off  of  these  supports,  the  amplitudes
vanish identically.  The two supports intersect only on the two N´eel configurations, and
thus ∣suppΦA∪ suppΦB∣= 21+N/2− 2.

The  momentum  eigenstates  live  on  the  union  support  and  differ  by  relative  phases
between the two coverings.  In particular, on the two N´eel configurations, the relative
phase between ∣ΦA⟩ and ∣ΦB⟩ is (−1)N/2,  and one of the combinations in (24) has an
exact node there, namely

            ⟨N´eel∣Ψk+⟩= 0  if N = 2(mod4)  ,   ⟨N´eel∣Ψk−⟩= 0  if N = 0(mod4),          (25)
while away from these two configurations ∣Ψk−⟩ and ∣Ψk+⟩ have nonzero amplitudes.  Al-
together,  the  common  support  suppΨk+ ∩ suppΨk−  equals  suppΦA∪ suppΦB  with  the
two N´eel strings removed.

The  representation  (20)  ensures  that  the  states  described  above  are  exact  eigen-
states  of   ˆHMG,  not  merely  variational  minima,  and  fixes  the  ground  energy  density
to E0/N = −3J1/8.  For the purpose of symmetry resolution on the periodic ring, it is
natural to work with the translation eigenstates ∣Ψk±⟩ carrying crystal momentak = 0,π.
The dimer products ∣ΦA/B⟩ are simply symmetry-broken representatives of the same 2-
dimensional ground manifold and are mapped into one another by a 1-site translation.

2.2.2.  ST-MH versus MT-MH empirical efficiency and accuracy
The first part will concern the performance analysis (both in terms of computational
resources and optimisation accuracy) of the ST-MH approach compared to that of the
MT-MH approach.  Throughout, we set J1 = 1 and hence J2 = 0.5.  Further, the trunk
for both the ST-MH and MT-MH ensembles is composed of a fully connected 2-hidden
layer  multi-layer  perceptron  (MLP)  whereby  both  hidden  layers  have  the  same  fixed
width  and  one  ReLU  activation  layer  sits  between  them.   The  orthogonality  penalty
strength is started from an initial value of λs = 1× 10−3 and annealed to λf = 1.0 over
100 optimisation steps.  Further, we use an Adam optimiser [49] with a fixed learning
rate of 1× 10−3.  Samples are generated using a Metropolis-Hastings sampler [50] with
a transition kernel which proposes new configurations by exchanging the spins of two
sites.  The initial proposal is created within theSz sector and hence, this transition ker-
nel preserves the sector.  The number of sweeps for the sampler is chosen to be 5 with a
                                                                                                         10

total of 512 samples generated at each sampling step distributed over 8 Markov chains.
Unless mentioned otherwise, the ensembles use a shared mixture sampling prescription
(see Appendix C).  For the following, we setN = 4, and consequently,E0(N = 4)=−1.5.
As the first part concerns performance metrics,  full  eigenspace resolution for different
values of N  is discussed in Section 2.2.3 below.

We  note  that  as  this  current  work  merely  serves  as  a  proof-of-principle,  the  purpose
of this work is therefore not  to find an optimal network architecture to efficiently solve
this physical model but rather focus on the applicability of the ST-MH ensemble ap-
proach.  Therefore, at no point do we concern ourselves with, for example, choosing an
architecture which has fewer number of parameters than there are states in the space.
However, we demonstrate through brief ablation studies in Section 2.2.3 that one can,
as one expects, approach the same problem with much smaller network sizes.

We  now  demonstrate  that  using  the  ST-MH  approach,  one  obtains  solutions  as  ac-
curately, as quickly, but more efficiently compared to the MT-MH approach.  The first
comparison done is observing both the runtime and the number of parameters as the
number of target states K increases.  Figure 1 shows the parameters count for different
K.  Keeping N = 4 and h = 32 for both ensembles,  we grow the number of heads for
the ST-MH and duplicate accordingly the wave-functions for MT-MH ensembles.  The
measured counts match a linear-in-K  scaling for both ST-MH and MT-MH parameter
counts (MT-MH duplicates the trunk per head).



















  Figure 1:    The number of parameters observed compared to the theoretical prediction for
  both the ST-MH and MT-MH NQS ensemble training for a network architecture composed
  of a MLP with 2 hidden layers and ReLU activations.

Here,  the  theory  lines  shown  in  the  figure  correspond  to  the  estimates  conducted  in
equations (35) and (36) in Section 2.3.1.  The substantially fewer number of parameters
for  the  ST-MH  NQS  ensemble  implies  not  only  a  smaller  memory  footprint  but  also
                                                                                                          11

computational time.  This can be seen in Figure 2.



















  Figure 2:    The average seconds-per-iteration time with respect to K for both ST-MH and
  MT-MH ensembles with the sampler cost held fixed averaged over 3 simulations for each
  K, whereby each included 100 optimisation.

Figure 2 shows the scaling of the average seconds-per-iteration with respect to different
values of K.  Here, the mean is computed over 3 simulations, each with 100 optimisa-
tion steps.  The figure shows the case for a fixed sampler cost.  Namely, both ensembles
draw from a shared mixture (instead of having independent samplers per-head/state).
The reason for this is to make the comparison explicit.  For small networks/systems,
the compute time required for sampling amortises that of the gradient computations,
resulting in skewed results.

In  this  case,  one  sees  that  the  ST-MH  ensemble  compute  time  is  nearly  flat  with K
(only head and overlap compute resources grow) whereas MT-MH ensemble compute
time increases roughly linearly due to theK-fold replication of the trunks.  The residual
slope in both curves is explained by the shared O(K2) pairwise-overlap computations
in the penalty.  More importantly, the smaller overall computational footprint for the
ST-MH  NQS  ensemble  does  not  come  at  a  cost  of  accuracy,  as  can  be  seen  in  what
follows.
Figure 3 shows the maximum absolute energy error across heads as a function of hidden
units h.  The results are averaged over 3 simulations with 100 optimisation steps each.
As shown, for relatively low h, the MT-MH approach has higher accuracy, unsurpris-
ingly, due to the fact that each target degenerate eigenstate hash trunk features in total
to represent it.  Comparatively, the h trunk features are shared among all target degen-
erate eigenstates in the ST-MH case.  This, however, is not an unavoidable hindrance,
as is shown in the ablation studies in Section 2.2.3.

Irrespectively,  as h  increases,  it  is  evident  that  the  maximum  absolute  energy  error
                                                                                                           12



















  Figure 3:    Maximum absolute energy error across heads as a function of hidden units is
  shown.  Both ST-MH and MT-MH ensembles achieve high and similar accuracy especially
  for higher trunk width.  The results are averaged over 3 simulations with 100 optimisation
  steps each.


of ST-MH quickly declines and further matches that of the MT-MH, indicating suffi-
cient representability of the total target states with a fraction of the available feature
space.  The shown plateau in both cases is an indicator that the network has become
expressive enough to saturate the accuracy allowed by the optimisation budget.  One
can  also  plot  the  obtained  energy  eigenvalue  for  both  the  heads  in  each  ensemble  as
shown below.























  Figure 4:    The evolution of the two eigenvalues Ek obtained by the two heads for the case
  of ST-MH and MT-MH ensembles.  The true ground energy is E0 = −1.5.  The results are
  averaged over 3 simulations with 500 optimisation steps each.
                                                                                                           13

Figure  4  shows  a  plot  of  the  evolution  of  the  two  eigenvalues  that  both  the  two
heads/networks in the ST-MH and MT-MH ensembles, respectively, converge to.  Once
more, the shown results are averages over 3 simulations, now each with 500 optimisation
steps.  As shown in the figure, both ensemble approaches converge quickly to the correct
ground energyE0 =−1.5 and stabilise near the same plateau, showing identical learning
speed  despite their very different parameter counts.  The fluctuations observed for both
ensembles are minor and are attributed to simply optimisation noise.  They are neither
large  enough  to  cause  any  discrepancy,  nor  large  enough  to  cause  any  instability  in
training.   Lastly,  to  demonstrate  that  both  ensembles  obtained  different  states,  the
evolution of the overlap matrix norm is shown in Figure 5.



















  Figure 5:    The Frobenius deviation ∥σ − 1∥F  is shown for both the ST-MH and MT-MH
  ensembles.  Both ensembles rapidly reduce the deviation and settle near zero.  The results
  are averaged over 3 simulations with 500 optimisation steps each.

Figure 5 shows the evolution of the orthogonality metric, namely the Frobenius norm
∥σ−1∥F , whereσ is the normalised overlap matrix between heads and 1 is the identity.
Note that here, the pairwise normalised overlap σkl, of which σ is constructed from, is
computed using the biased estimator outlined in Appendix C equation (C.7).  However,
post-training (see Table 1 below), an exact computation is carried out whereby the full-
space is enumerated and pairwise-overlaps are computed explicitly.  It was observed to
be the case that the exact computation fell within low error ranges.

As shown in the figure,  both ensembles converge to nearly 0,  indicating that the two
obtained  normalised  states  are  mutually  orthogonal.   Coupled  with  the  fact  that  the
two obtained states, in each ensemble approach, independently also arrived at an en-
ergy  eigenvalue  close  to  the  true E0,  this  is  a  soft  indicator  which  may  allow  one  to
conclude that the two are indeed different eigenstates in the ground space.  In the fol-
lowing section, we ensure that this is indeed the case.  Consequently, this implies that
the orthogonality penalty did in fact force the states to be mutually orthogonal as in-
                                                                                                         14

tended.

Lastly,  we  note  that  the  compute  time  as  a  function  of  the  system  size N  was  also
studied for different chain lengths of even sites N = 4,⋯, 10 and K = 2.  It was observed
that  ST-MH  remains  faster  than  MT-MH  at  all  sizes,  but  both  compute  times  grow
modestly.  This was true for both ensembles for both the shared sampler approach or
the independent sampler approach where each head received its own sampler.

We note that in principle, for the MT-MH ensemble, there could be some trunk width
h which is smaller than that considered for the ST-MH ensemble but still converges to
the solutions.  In that case, the total parameter count and the total runtime will differ
from what is presented here.  However, as this specific trunk width may be difficult to
know a priori, for the purpose of comparison we set both trunk widths to be the same
for the ST-MH and MT-MH ensembles.  A more detailed discussion on different trunk
widths is presented in Section 2.3 below.

2.2.3.  Fidelity tests and full ground space resolution
The purpose of this section is to demonstrate the capability of the ST-MH NQS ensem-
ble to resolve the entire degenerate ground space.  To test this,  the NQS ensemble is
used to resolve the degenerate ground space of once again the same frustrated J1−J2
Heisenberg chain at the MG point described in previous sections, but with various num-
ber  of  sites N = 4, 6, 8.   We  also  present  brief  ablation  studies  for  the  case  of N = 4.
To this end, we evaluate a series of diagnostics that jointly assess both the accuracy of
individual heads as approximate eigenstates and the collective ability of the ensemble
to span the full degenerate manifold.

First,  post-training and using full enumeration (e.g.  obtain the kth  obtained solution
by using the optimised ST-MH ensemble to output the amplitudes for all basis states
in the Hilbert space through head k), for each head we compute the expectation value
of the Hamiltonian  ˆH and its variance Var( ˆH).  The expectation provides a direct com-
parison to the exact ground energy, while the variance quantifies how close the state is
to being a true eigenstate.  Next, we measure the fidelity of each head with the exact
ground state subspace,  as obtained from exact diagonalisation.  The ground-subspace
fidelity captures the fraction of the head’s wave-function that resides within the true
ground manifold.  Averaging this quantity across all heads provides a compact insight
into ensemble accuracy, while the spread across heads indicates how uniformly the states
approach the ground space.

Lastly, in order to truly attest that the ensemble does not merely produce orthogonal
states in the full Hilbert space but actually spans the ground subspace itself, we project
the heads onto the exact ground space and analyse the resulting projection matrix.  To
                                                                                                             15

formalise this, let Ψ = [ψ1 ... ψK] denote the matrix of obtained solutions generated
from the K  optimised heads (each column representing a normalised variational wave-
function in the computational basis).  Let V0 = [v1 ... vg] be the exact ground state
eigenvectors obtained by exact diagonalisation, spanning the degenerate manifold of di-
mension g.  The orthogonal projector onto the ground space is then PG =V0V †0 .  With
this notation, we define the projection matrix
                                                  C =V †0 Ψ,                                                       (26)
whose entries encode the overlaps ⟨vi∣ψk⟩ between the exact ground basis and the learned
heads.  Several diagnostics are derived from C:
   ●  Ground-subspace fidelity:  for a head ψk, the fidelity is given by
                                                Fk = ⟨ψk∣PG∣ψk⟩,                                              (27)
     namely the squared norm of its projection onto the ground manifold.  Values lie in
     [0, 1], withFk = 1 signifying perfect confinement to the ground subspace andFk = 0
     indicating full leakage into excited states.
   ●  Pairwise overlaps:  the head overlap matrix is defined as
                                                   σkl = ⟨ψk∣ψl⟩,                                                (28)
     and  computed  via  exact  computation  not  the  biased  estimator  as  done  during
     training and shown in Figure 5.  Ideally,σ approaches the identity, reflecting mutual
     orthogonality of the obtained states.  Deviations, as done previously, are quantified
     by the Frobenius norm ∥σ−I∥F , where values near zero indicate nearly orthogonal
     solutions.
   ●  Singular  values  and  principal  angles:   performing  singular-value  decomposition
     (SVD)  of  the  projection  matrix, C = UΣW †,  yields  non-negative  singular  values
     σi ∈ [0, 1] whose cosines are the principal angles between the subspace spanned by
     the ensemble Ψ and the exact ground space.  Several conclusions can be drawn:
       (i) σi = 1 (angle 0○) means that direction is perfectly captured,
      (ii) σi = 0 (angle 90○) means that direction is entirely missing.  Intermediate values
           quantify partial coverage.
     (iii)Rank  condition:  if  rank    (C) = g,  then  all  directions  of  the  ground  space  are
           in  principle  represented  by  the  ensemble.   Missing  rank  indicates  that  some
           eigenstates are absent.
     (iv)Condition number:  the ratio   κ = σmax/σmin  characterises numerical stability.
           A moderate κ implies the ensemble spans the manifold in a well-conditioned
           manner.  Large κ values reflect near-linear dependence of the projected heads,
           meaning some directions are only weakly resolved even if rank is complete.
   ●  Effective dimension deff:  the effective dimensions are the dimensions of the ground
     space  which  we  considered  as  truly  resolved.   This  is  accounted  for  by  counting
     the number of singular values of the SVD decomposed projection matrix which are
     ≥ 0.99.
                                                                                                                                     16

                 Together,  these  metrics  provide  a  layered  diagnostic:   energy  and  variance  measure
                 individual accuracy, fidelities confirm that each state lies within the ground space, the
                 overlap matrix quantifies orthogonality and the SVD of C  attests that the ensemble as
                 a whole spans the degenerate ground manifold with controlled conditioning.

                    Table  1:      Representative  diagnostics  (across  3  simulations)  of  ST-MH  ensembles  for
                    resolving  the  degenerate  ground  space  of  the  frustrated J1 −J2  Heisenberg  chain  at  the
                    MG  point  with N  =  4, 6, 8  sites.   Listed  are  the  ground  state  degeneracy g,  number  of
                    ensemble heads K, exact and average learned head-energies E0 and  ¯E, maximum per-head
                    quantum variance of  the full Hamiltonian at  the final iterate  across all  heads,  mean and
                    minimum ground-subspace fidelity Fmean,Fmin, rank of the projection matrix C  relative to
                    g, smallest singular valueσmin, condition numberκ, Frobenius deviation of the head overlap
                    matrix from the identity, and the lowest effective dimension deff  resolved by the ensemble
                    in 3 conducted simulations as an independent column.  Ablation studies for the N = 4 case
                    are marked with (B) and (C).









                 As seen in Table 1, across various system sizes of N = 4, 6, 8, the diagnostics indicate
                 good convergence§ to the two degenerate momentum eigenstates.  Across three seeds per
                 N, the per-simulation mean energies are highly consistent (maximum standard deviation
                 of ≈ 10−3 forN = 6).  Likewise, the mean ground subspace fidelities were observed to also
                 be stable (maximum standard deviation ≈ 10−3  for N = 6) with a maximum standard
                 deviation in the spread of ≈ 10−3 for N = 6).  We therefore show a single representative
                 per runN  for conservatism.  The reported effective dimension resolved deff is the lowest
                 effective dimension across all three seeds.

                 The  average  head  energies  closely  reproduce  the  exact  ground  energy E0,  with  max-
                 imum per-head quantum variance of the full Hamiltonian at the final iterate across all
                 heads  in  the  order  of  10−3,  confirming  that  the  states  are  nearly  perfect  eigenstates.
                 Fidelities  exceed  0.999  uniformly  across  all  heads,  demonstrating  accurate  restriction
                 to the ground manifold.  The projection matrices have full rank with well-conditioned
                 singular  spectra,  and  the  pairwise  overlap  norms  remain  well  below  0.01.   Taken  to-
                 gether, these indicate that for these smaller systems the ensemble not only reproduces
                 each ground state individually, but also spans the degenerate subspace in a numerically
                 stable manner.

                 For  even N ≥  10,  convergence  was  relatively  hard  to  achieve  for  both  heads,  likely

 N  g K  E0         ¯E      maxVar( ˆH)   Fmean ± std    Fmin    rank(C)/g σmin(C) κ(C)  ∥σ −1∥F§  Exact simulation setup parameters used are shown in Table D1 in Appendix Ddeff
                                (×10−3)
 4    2   2  −1.5000  −1.5000      0.035      0.999991± 2.50× 10−6  0.999988      2/2      0.999991  1.000  0.0047362
4(B)  2   2  −1.5000  −1.4999      0.574      0.999928± 5.35× 10−5  0.999874      2/2      0.999933  1.000  0.0084852
4(C)  2   2  −1.5000  −1.5000      0.076      0.999967± 3.00× 10−6  0.999964      2/2      0.999976  1.000  0.0068702
 6    2   2  −2.2500  −2.2492      1.612      0.999319± 1.01× 10−4  0.999219      2/2      0.999524  1.000  0.0041532
 8    2   2  −3.0000  −2.9977      6.143      0.998158± 6.56× 10−4  0.997502      2/2      0.998601  1.001  0.0809332
                                                                                                          17

arising from a combination of factors.  For example, one observed effect is the penalty
schedule for encouraging head diversification can interact with network capacity:  if en-
forced  too  strongly  or  too  early,  heads  may  stabilise  into  nearly  redundant  solutions
rather  than  exploring  orthogonal  directions.   Conversely,  if  imposed  too  weakly,  they
may fail to separate before convergence to the ground manifold.  Finally, the effective
expressive power of the network architecture may begin to saturate atN ≥ 10.  Although
this is less likely (as we have achieved a few good convergence simulations for N = 10
but are not shown due to being difficult to reproduce across seeds), it remains a relevant
concern.  In the ST-MH NQS ensemble, all target states share a trunk.  Therefore, if a
simple architecture converges in the MT-MH case,  this does not mean that the same
must be true if used in the ST-MH approach.  As the purpose of this numerical veri-
fication is to only provide a proof-of-principle on the applicability of the ST-MH NQS
ensemble, we do not further attempt to fully verify specific reasons for this behaviour
observed in this physical model.

Nevertheless,  we  do  conduct  a  very  simple  ablation  study  to  demonstrate  the  inter-
play  between  the  network  capacity  and  the  simulation  parameters.   Table  1  shows  a
total of three entries for N = 4, two of which are labelled by (B) and (C) respectively.
As shown in Table D1 in Appendix D, the simulation 4(C) was conducted with a trunk
width of only 4 (compared to standard trunk width of choice of 32 for the data shown
for N = 4 in Table 1).  Further, for N = 4(B), the trunk width is only 2.  Despite that,
Table  1  shows  good  convergence  for  both  cases.   While  this  shows  the  robustness  of
the NQS ansatz in general and the ST-MH NQS ensemble specifically to parametrise
more than one solution with a relatively small network,  the change of simulation pa-
rameters required for this (shown in Table D1) highlights the delicate interplay between
the network capacity and the simulation parameters.  Hence, this further solidifies the
argument presented for the difficulty of convergence for N ≥ 10.

Note that for this model, the two momentum ground states have flat modulus on the
common  support,  therefore RG = span{1S}  and  hence rG = 1.   For  the  phases,  they
coincide on suppΦA∖ suppΦB and differ byπ on suppΦB∖ suppΦA.  Since 1suppΦB  is in-
dependent of 1S , this gives dim span{1S, Ω+, Ω−}= 3 and hence rboth = 3 and h⋆both = 2.
The ablation results, specifically the case of 4(B) shown in the Table 1 above, empir-
ically supports the theorem’s assertion that with a minimal width of h = 2, using the
ST-MH NQS ensemble one can indeed resolve the entire degenerate ground manifold.

2.3.  Cost, efficiency, and when to prefer ST-MH

Both  ST-MH  and  MT-MH  ensembles  converge  to  the  same  set  of K  degenerate
eigenstates,  provided  the  network  is  expressive  enough.    The  practical  question  is
therefore  which  architecture  reaches  that  goal  with  less  runtime  and  memory.    In
what follows, we provide a qualitative computational cost analysis for a simple network
                                                                                                           18

architecture and outline a threshold for the efficiency of the ST-MH approach.

2.3.1.  Costs and parameter count
Consider the following  qualitative  cost model.  Assume that the input to any network
considered isN (e.g.  the number of sites in the lattice) and that the trunk is composed
of  two  layers  and  has  a  final  output  features  vector  of  size h(s/m).   Here,  the (s/m)
denotes whether we are considering the width for the ST-MH (denoted s) or the MT-
MH (denoted m) trunk.  For clarity,  we only count matrix-vector multiplications and
absorb activation functions and constant factors from automatic differentiation libraries
in prefactors.  For one forward pass, the floating point operations (FLOPs) count is

                           F (s/m)T    = (Nh(s/m)+h2(s/m))    multiplications,                           (29)

arising from multiplying anN×h(s/m) weight matrix by anN-vector (Nh(s/m) multipli-
cations, input to first hidden layer), then multiplying a h(s/m)×h(s/m) weight matrix by
the latent vector (h2(s/m) multiplications, hidden to hidden).  In principle, there would be
one more last (linear readout) operation, consisting of multiplying an h(s/m)× 1 weight
vector by theh(s/m)-dimensional latent vector (h(s/m) multiplications, hidden to scalar).
This is excluded from the trunk forward pass, as shown above, and is accounted for later
in the head FLOPs count below.

A  backward  pass  (reverse-mode  automatic  differentiation)  through  the  network  costs
almost  the  same  order  of  magnitude.   In  principle,  we  replay  every  operation  in  the
forward pass and additionally compute a matrix-vector product (vector-Jacobian prod-
uct) per weight matrix to form gradients.  Empirically, the rule of thumb is that it may
amount to roughly 2× the cost of a forward pass.  Therefore, we can set

                                            B(s/m)T   ≃ 2F (s/m)T   .                                                 (30)

The head  (a single linear readout that produces two scalars for phase and amplitude)
costs
                              F (s/m)H   = 2h(s/m),    B(s/m)H   ≃ 2F (s/m)H  .                                (31)
For the ST-MH ensemble, for NMC  Monte Carlo samples in one gradient update, the
compute cost is

           CST−MH =NMC(F (s)T  +B(s)T +K(F (s)H +B(s)H ))≈NMC(3F (s)T  + 6Kh(s)).        (32)

Since F (s/m)T    ∝ Nh(s/m) +h2(s/m)  while  the  head  term  scales  like Kh(s/m),  the  trunk
dominates  when  3F (s/m)T    ≫  6Kh(s/m) ⇔ Nh(s/m) +h2(s/m) ≫  2Kh(s/m)  (i.e.  K ≪
(N +h(s/m))/2).  In this regime,

                                          CST−MH ≈ 3NMCF (s)T .                                              (33)
                                                                                                          19

For a MT-MH ensemble, the trunk is duplicated K times, so

                                       CMT−MH ≈ 3KNMCF (m)T  .                                           (34)

If h(s) = h(m),  this  results  in  a K-fold  increase  in  both  compute  time  and  memory
footprint as can roughly be seen in Figures 1 and 2.  The number of trainable parameters
scales in the same manner.  Namely

                           PST−MH∝ (N + 1)h(s)+h2(s)+ 2Kh(s),                                     (35)
                           PMT−MH∝K((N + 1)h(m)+h2(m)+ 2h(m)).                           (36)

Therefore, if h(s) =h(m), then PMT−MH ≈KPST−MH.

In both  ensembles, evaluating the overlap penalty P  and its gradients requires all pair-
wise normalised overlapsσkl, which introduces an additional head-onlyO(K2) term.  A
simple estimate is
                                       C(s/m)pen.  ≈cNMCK(K− 1),                                          (37)
where c collects small constants from the importance sampling estimators in Appendix
C.  This term is common to both ST-MH and MT-MH, and is typically subdominant
when  trunks  dominate  cost.   However,  for  large K  and/or  large NMC  it  can  become
comparable to the trunk cost and should be accounted for in wall-time predictions.

2.3.2.  Efficiency threshold
ST-MH ensembles can represent K orthogonal states with a single latent dimensionh(s)
as long ash(s)+1≥rboth∥, whererboth is the combined linear rank of the states’ log-moduli
and phases on the common finite support (see Appendix A). BecauserG ≤ min{D+1,∣S∣}
and, for simultaneous moduli and phases,rboth ≤ min{2D+1,∣S∣}, choosingh(s) ≥rboth−1
ensures exact representability  without unnecessarily inflating the trunk.  Since memory
co-scales under our simple model with the compute time, ST-MH ensembles are strictly
preferable unless one deliberately wishes to eliminate trunk parameter sharing (e.g.  to
avoid latent space interference).

Note  that K  can  exceed N.   In  such  cases,  if K ≫ N  the  required  rank rboth  may
also grow with K, meaning that ST-MH trunks must be correspondingly wider.  This
means that while ST-MH remains representationally sufficient wheneverrboth ≤h+1, the
efficiency advantage over MT-MH starts to diminish when degeneracy scales extensively
compared  to N.   However,  to  obtain  an  empirical  threshold,  consider  once  more  the
costs in equations (32) and (33) and further include the dropped head terms 6Kh(s/m).
Now assume that the MT-MH ansatz can represent each state with a trunk width h(m)

∥  Theorem A.1’s assertion is a representability statement on a finite support.  It does not claim any
expressivity, learnability or parameter efficiency assumptions (see Remark A.3)
                                                                                                           20

and further, h(s) ≠h(m).  Now, solving

                                       CST−MH ≤CMT−MH                                                     (38)
                      Nh(s)+h2(s)+ 2Kh(s) ≤K(Nh(m)+h2(m))+ 2Kh(m),                      (39)

for h(s) one can obtain a precise threshold

                        −(N + 2K)+√(N + 2K)2+ 4K(Nh(m)+h2(m)+ 2h(m))
                h⋆(s) =                                   2                  .             (40)

This shows that if h(s) ∈ [0,h⋆(s)], the ST-MH approach is cheaper or equal to the MT-
MH.  Otherwise,  the  MT-MH  is  computationally  cheaper.   Precisely,  one  can  write  a
slowdown factor
                                       R(h(s))= CST−MH(h(s))CMT−MH(h(m)),                                          (41)

where  if R(h(s)) < 1,  the  ST-MH  ensemble  is  faster  by  a  factor  of  1/R(h(s))  while  if
R(h(s))> 1, it is slower by a factor of R(h(s)).

In this qualitative model, we assume a 2-hidden layer fully connected trunk with equal
hidden widthsh(s/m).  The threshold above isolates the last layer  feature sizes h(s/m) as
the deciding knobs:  for a given per-head budget h(m), ST-MH is preferable whenever
the shared last layer width h(s)  stays below the break-even value in equation (40).  In
practice,  however, h(s)  and h(m)  are  just  the  dimensions  of  the  trunks’  final  feature
vector.  The preceding layers can be deep and wide.  For an arbitrary fully connected
network, one should replaceFT by the layer-wise sum∑ldl−1dl (and keep the head term)
where di is the size of the layer i and d0 =N.  For different architectures (e.g.  convolu-
tional networks), the accounting is architecture specific.  A similar substitution uses the
per-layer FLOP counts (e.g.  for convolutional networks, kernel height × kernel width ×
in-channels × out-channels × spatial positions), with the same head term unchanged.

In  this  simple  cost  model,  the  qualitative  message  survives:  efficiency  hinges  on  the
compactness of the shared representation, but the numerical threshold shifts with ar-
chitectural choices upstream of the last layer.  Therefore,  while the equation says the
sizesh(s/m) decide, in reality whether a given architecture achieves a small effectiveh(s)
without inflating earlier layers is ultimately an empirical question which our simple cost
model only approximates.  Note that very large h can make the Monte Carlo estimator
of the natural gradient matrix noisy, and may require a larger amount of samples NMC
or stronger regularisers.  In that regime, the theoretical advantage may shrink.

3.  Conclusion

This work presents a unified and systematic approach for training NQS ensembles to
capture  degenerate  ground  states  using  variational  Monte  Carlo.   By  formulating  ex-
act  gradient  expressions  and  leveraging  a  linear  rank  based  expressivity  theorem,  we
                                                                                                        21

demonstrated that the single-trunk multi-head (ST-MH) ensemble can represent all de-
generate states exactly whenever the trunk width satisfies h+ 1 ≥rboth, where rboth  is
the combined linear rank of the states’ log-moduli and phases on a common support in
the degenerate target manifold where all states are non-vanishing.

When  this  criterion  is  met,  ST-MH  can  offer  a,  in  some  situations,  substantial  com-
putational and memory advantage over the multi-trunk multi-head (MT-MH) ensem-
ble,  with  no  loss  in  accuracy.   Our  numerical  experiments  for  the  frustrated  spin- 12
J1−J2  Heisenberg  chain  on  a  periodic  ring  with  even  number  of  sites,  considered  at
the Majumdar-Ghosh point, confirm the theoretical cost advantage expectations.  The
conducted full degenerate ground space resolution, including fidelity tests, orthogonal-
ity and complete spanning of the true degenerate ground manifold further strengthen
the applicability of this ensemble ansatz, all the meanwhile reducing runtime and the
required memory resources relative to an MT-MH ensemble with the same trunk width
per-head would require.  Through ablation studies, we provide empirical support for the
theorem’s assertion that the minimal trunk latent width h⋆both = 2 (for the considered
model) needed to resolve the full degenerate ground state manifold is indeed true by
converging to the two momentum eigenstates with a trunk of width h= 2.

A qualitative computational cost analysis for a simple 2-hidden layer fully connected
network shows that one can (in theory) provide a threshold on the ST-MH trunk width
whereby the ST-MH approach offers significant increase in efficiency compared to the
MT-MH approach.  These findings establish practical and scalable guidelines for select-
ing NQS architectures in multi-state quantum learning tasks,  highlighting ST-MH as
potentially a preferred approach in settings where expressivity conditions are met.

Moreover, while the ST-MH approach further extends the expressivity of the NQS ansatz
by showing it is robust enough to represent many states with one network, this archi-
tectural separation between shared features and linear heads may also prove valuable
beyond single-system degenerate eigenspaces, such as in transfer learning situations us-
ing foundation neural networks [51] where a single trunk may be able to learn general
representations adaptable across multiple quantum systems.

4.  Acknowledgments

The author thanks Hanno Sahlmann for the helpful comments and conversations which
helped  bring  this  work  to  its  current  form.    The  author  gratefully  acknowledges
the  scientific  support  and  HPC  resources  provided  by  the  Erlangen  National  High
Performance  Computing  Center  (NHR@FAU)  of  the  Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨at
Erlangen-N¨urnberg (FAU). The hardware is funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG).
                                                                                                                             22

References

[1]D.    Ceperley,     B.    Alder,     “Quantum    Monte    Carlo,”     Science       231    (1986),     555-560
     doi:10.1126/science.231.4738.555
[2]W. M. C. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. J. Needs and G. Rajagopal, “Quantum Monte Carlo simulations of
     solids,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 73 (2001), 33-83 doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.73.33
[3]J. Carlson, S. Gandolfi, F. Pederiva, S. C. Pieper, R. Schiavilla, K. E. Schmidt and R. B. Wiringa,
     “Quantum  Monte  Carlo  methods  for  nuclear  physics,”   Rev.  Mod.  Phys.  87  (2015),   1067
     doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.87.1067 [arXiv:1412.3081 [nucl-th]].
[4]F.  Becca,  S.  Sorella,  “Quantum  Monte  Carlo  Approaches  for  Correlated  Systems,”  Cambridge
     University Press (2017), doi:10.1017/9781316417041
[5]R.  Orus,  “A  Practical  Introduction  to  Tensor  Networks:   Matrix  Product  States  and  Projected
     Entangled   Pair   States,”   Annals   Phys.   349   (2014),   117-158   doi:10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013
     [arXiv:1306.2164 [cond-mat.str-el]].
[6]M.  Zwolak,  G.  Vidal,  “Mixed-State  Dynamics  in  One-Dimensional  Quantum  Lattice  Systems:
     A  Time-Dependent  Superoperator  Renormalization  Algorithm,”  Phys.  Rev.  Lett. 93  (2004,11),
     207205 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.207205
[7]G.  Evenbly,  G.  Vidal,  “Class  of  Highly  Entangled  Many-Body  States  that  can  be  Efficiently
     Simulated,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014,6), 240502 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.240502
[8]G.    Vidal,    “Entanglement    Renormalization,”    Phys.    Rev.    Lett.       99    (2007,11),    220405
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.220405
[9]Y. Shi, L. Duan, G. Vidal, “Classical simulation of quantum many-body systems with a tree tensor
     network,” Phys. Rev. A 74 (2006,8), 022320 doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.74.022320
[10]L.   Cincio,   J.   Dziarmaga,   M.   Rams,   “Multiscale   Entanglement   Renormalization   Ansatz
     in   Two   Dimensions:     Quantum   Ising   Model,”   Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   100   (2008,6),   240603
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.240603
[11]F.  Verstraete  and  J.  I.  Cirac,  “Renormalization  algorithms  for  quantum-many  body  systems  in
     two and higher dimensions,” [arXiv:cond-mat/0407066 [cond-mat]].
[12]A.  Kl¨umper,  A.  Schadschneider  and  J.  Zittartz,  “Matrix  Product  Ground  States  for  One-
     Dimensional Spin-1 Quantum Antiferromagnets,” EPL 24 (1993) no.4, 293-297 doi:10.1209/0295-
     5075/24/4/010 [arXiv:cond-mat/9307028 [cond-mat]].
[13]U.       Schollw¨ock,        “The       density-matrix       renormalization       group       in       the       age
     of       matrix       product       states,”        Annals       Of       Physics      326       (2011),        96-192
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003491610001752
[14]S. White, “Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups,” Phys. Rev. Lett.      69
     (1992,11), 2863-2866 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.2863
[15]U. Schollw¨ock, “The density-matrix renormalization group,” Rev. Mod. Phys.      77 (2005,4), 259-315
     doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.77.259
[16]G.  Carleo  and  M.  Troyer,  “Solving  the  quantum  many-body  problem  with  artificial  neural
     networks,” Science 355 (2017) no.6325, 602-606 doi:10.1126/science.aag2302
[17]O. Sharir, A. Shashua, G. Carleo, “Neural tensor contractions and the expressive power of deep
     neural quantum states,” Phys. Rev. B 106 (2022,11), 205136 doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.106.205136
[18]D. Deng, X. Li, S. Das Sarma, “Quantum Entanglement in Neural Network States,” Phys. Rev.
     X 7 (2017,5), 021021 doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.7.021021
[19]X.  Gao,  L.  Duan,  “Efficient  representation  of  quantum  many-body  states  with  deep  neural
     networks,” Nature Communications 8 (2017,9), 662 doi:10.1038/s41467-017-00705-2
[20]G.  Passetti,  D.  Hofmann,  P.  Neitemeier,  L.  Grunwald,  M.  A.  Sentef  and  D.  M.  Kennes,  “Can
     Neural Quantum States Learn Volume-Law Ground States?,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 131 (2023) no.3,
     036502 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.036502 [arXiv:2212.02204 [quant-ph]].
[21]Y.  Levine,   O.  Sharir,   N.  Cohen,   A.  Shashua,   “Quantum  Entanglement  in  Deep  Learning
     Architectures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 (2019,2), 065301 doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.065301
                                                                                                                             23

[22]K. Choo,  T. Neupert,  G. Carleo,  “Two-dimensional frustrated   J1-J2  model studied with neural
     network quantum states,” Phys. Rev. B 100 (2019,9), 125124 doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.125124
[23]D. Luo,  Z.  Chen,  K. Hu,  Z.  Zhao,  V. M.  Hur and  B. K.  Clark,  “Gauge-invariant and anyonic-
     symmetric autoregressive neural network for quantum lattice models,” Phys. Rev. Res. 5 (2023)
     no.1, 013216 doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.013216 [arXiv:2101.07243 [cond-mat.str-el]].
[24]D.  Pfau,   J.  Spencer,   A.  Matthews,   W.  Foulkes,   “Ab  initio  solution  of  the  many-electron
     Schr¨odinger   equation   with   deep   neural   networks,”   Phys.   Rev.   Res.   2   (2020,9),   033429
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.033429
[25]J.  Hermann,  Z.  Sch¨atzle,  F.  No´e,  “Deep-neural-network  solution  of  the  electronic  Schr¨odinger
     equation,” Nature Chemistry 12 (2020,10), 891-897 doi:10.1038/s41557-020-0544-y
[26]D.   Luo,   G.   Carleo,   B.   K.   Clark   and   J.   Stokes,   “Gauge   Equivariant   Neural   Networks
     for   Quantum   Lattice   Gauge   Theories,”    Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   127   (2021)   no.27,    276402
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.276402 [arXiv:2012.05232 [cond-mat.str-el]].
[27]J. M. Martyn, K. Najafi and D. Luo, “Variational Neural-Network Ansatz for Continuum Quantum
     Field  Theory,”  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  131  (2023)  no.8,  081601  doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.081601
     [arXiv:2212.00782 [quant-ph]].
[28]Z. Denis and G. Carleo, “Accurate neural quantum states for interacting lattice bosons,” Quantum
     9 (2025), 1772 doi:10.22331/q-2025-06-17-1772 [arXiv:2404.07869 [quant-ph]].
[29]G.   Pan,    Z.   Meng,    “The   sign   problem   in   quantum   Monte   Carlo   simulations,”    En-
     cyclopedia    Of    Condensed    Matter    Physics    (Second    Edition)    (2024),     pp.    879-893
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323908009000950
[30]M.   Troyer   and   U.   J.   Wiese,    “Computational   complexity   and   fundamental   limitations
     to   fermionic   quantum   Monte   Carlo   simulations,”   Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   94   (2005),   170201
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.170201 [arXiv:cond-mat/0408370 [cond-mat]].
[31]H.  Sahlmann  and  W.  Sherif,  “Towards  quantum  gravity  with  neural  networks:   solving  the
     quantum Hamilton constraint of U(1) BF theory,” Class. Quant. Grav. 41 (2024) no.22, 225014
     doi:10.1088/1361-6382/ad84af [arXiv:2402.10622 [gr-qc]].
[32]H. Sahlmann and W. Sherif, “Towards quantum gravity with neural networks:  solving quantum
     Hamilton constraints of 3d Euclidean gravity in the weak coupling limit,” Class. Quant. Grav. 41
     (2024) no.21, 215006 doi:10.1088/1361-6382/ad7c14 [arXiv:2405.00661 [gr-qc]].
[33]O.  Higgott,  D.  Wang  and  S.  Brierley,  “Variational  Quantum  Computation  of  Excited  States,”
     Quantum 3 (2019), 156 doi:10.22331/q-2019-07-01-156 [arXiv:1805.08138 [quant-ph]].
[34]S.  Pathak,   B.  Busemeyer,   J.  Rodrigues,   L.  Wagner,   “Excited  states  in  variational  Monte
     Carlo  using  a  penalty  method,”   The  Journal  Of  Chemical  Physics  154  (2021,1),   034101
     doi:10.1063/5.0030949
[35]D. Pfau, S. Axelrod, H. Sutterud, I. von Glehn and J. S. Spencer, “Accurate Computation of Quan-
     tum Excited States with Neural Networks,” Science 385 (2024), 6711 doi:10.1126/science.adn0137
     [arXiv:2308.16848 [physics.comp-ph]].
[36]S. Bao, D. Wu, P. Zhang, L. Wang, “Learning eigenstates of quantum many-body Hamiltonians
     within the symmetric subspaces using neural network quantum states,” Phys. Rev. B 111 (2025,4),
     L161116 doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.111.L161116
[37]K.   Choo,   G.   Carleo,   N.   Regnault,   T.   Neupert,   “Symmetries   and   Many-Body   Excita-
     tions   with   Neural-Network   Quantum   States,”   Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   121   (2018,10),   167204
     doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.167204
[38]W.  Wheeler,  K.  Kleiner,  L.  Wagner,  “Ensemble  variational  Monte  Carlo  for  optimization  of
     correlated excited state wave functions,” Electronic Structure 6 (2024,4), 025001 doi:10.1088/2516-
     1075/ad38f8
[39]C.  Filippi,  M.  Zaccheddu,  F.  Buda,  “Absorption  Spectrum  of  the  Green  Fluorescent  Protein
     Chromophore:   A  Difficult  Case  for  ab  Initio  Methods?,”  Journal  Of  Chemical  Theory  And
     Computation 5 (2009,8), 2074-2087 doi:10.1021/ct900227j
[40]P. Taranc´on-      ´Alvarez, P. Tejerina-P´erez, R. Jimenez, P. Protopapas, “Efficient PINNs via multi-
                                                                                                                           24

     head unimodular regularization of the solutions space,” Communications Physics 8 (2025,8), 335
     doi:10.1038/s42005-025-02248-1
[41]R. Pellegrin, B. Bullwinkel, M. Mattheakis, P. Protopapas, P. “Transfer Learning with Physics-
     Informed Neural Networks for Efficient Simulation of Branched Flows,” (2022), [arXiv:2211.00214
     [cs.LG]]
[42]Z.  Zou,  G.  Karniadakis,  “L-HYDRA:  Multi-Head  Physics-Informed  Neural  Networks,”  (2023),
     [arXiv:2301.02152 [[cs.LG]]]
[43]S. Axelrod, E. Shakhnovich, R. G´omez-Bombarelli, “Excited state non-adiabatic dynamics of large
     photoswitchable  molecules  using  a  chemically  transferable  machine  learning  potential,”  Nature
     Communications 13 (2022), 3440 doi:10.1038/s41467-022-30999-w
[44]C. Majumdar, “Antiferromagnetic model with known ground state,” Journal Of Physics C: Solid
     State Physics 3 (1970,4), 911 doi:10.1088/0022-3719/3/4/019
[45]C. Majumdar, D. Ghosh, “On Next-Nearest-Neighbor Interaction in Linear Chain. I,” Journal Of
     Mathematical Physics 10 (1969,8), 1388-1398 doi:10.1063/1.1664978
[46]C. Majumdar, D. Ghosh, “On Next-Nearest-Neighbor Interaction in Linear Chain. II,” Journal Of
     Mathematical Physics 10 (1969,8), 1399-1402 doi:10.1063/1.1664979
[47]H. Lange, A. Van de Walle, A. Abedinnia and A. Bohrdt, “From architectures to applications:  a
     review of neural quantum states,” Quantum Sci. Technol. 9 (2024) no.4, 040501 doi:10.1088/2058-
     9565/ad7168 [arXiv:2402.09402 [cond-mat.dis-nn]].
[48]M. Hibat-Allah,  M. Ganahl,  L. Hayward,  R. Melko,  J. Carrasquilla,  “Recurrent neural network
     wave functions,” Physical Review Research 2 (2020,6), doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023358
[49]D.  Kingma,  J.  Ba,  “Adam:   A  Method  for  Stochastic  Optimization,”  (2017),  [arXiv:1412.6980
     [cs.LG]]
[50]N. Metropolis, A. Rosenbluth, M. Rosenbluth, A. Teller, E. Teller, “Equation of State Calculations
     by  Fast  Computing  Machines,”   The  Journal  Of  Chemical  Physics  21  (1953,6),   1087-1092
     doi:10.1063/1.1699114
[51]R. Rende, L. Viteritti, F. Becca, A. Scardicchio, A. Laio, G. Carleo, “Foundation neural-networks
     quantum  states  as  a  unified  Ansatz  for  multiple  hamiltonians,”  Nature  Communications  16
     (2025,8,5), 7213 doi:10.1038/s41467-025-62098-x
                                                                                                           25

Appendices

A. Representability theorem

Let  C  be  a  finite  configurations  (e.g.    spin  configurations)  set  of  size M.    It  is
convenient to identify real-valued functions on C with vectors in RM by fixing an ordering
C ∶= {x1,⋯,xM} and identifying real functions A on C  with their evaluation (column)
vectors such that

                       A∶ C→ R⇔ evC(A)∶= (A(x1),⋯,A(xM))⊺ ∈ RM×1,                    (A.1)

which  is  simply  a  linear  isomorphism.    Now  suppose  we  are  given D-many  target
complex-valued wave-functions {Ψ(j)∶ C→ C}Dj=1.  For anyx∈ C, and when Ψ(j) ≠ 0, one
can write
                                Ψ(j)(x)= exp[GΨ(j)(x)+ iΩΨ(j)(x)],                                (A.2)
where
                       GΨ(j)(x)∶= ln∣Ψ(j)(x)∣  ,    ΩΨ(j)(x)∶= arg Ψ(j)(x).                    (A.3)
When Ψ(j)(x)= 0, then the corresponding GΨ(j)(x) is undefined.  Therefore, let

                             D
                 C ⊇ S ∶=   ⋂
                            j=1 suppΨ(j)  ,    suppΨ(j)∶= {x∈ C ∶ ∣Ψ(j)(x)∣> 0},             (A.4)
be denoted the common  support.  Note that from this point onward, S  is  assumed  to
have a fixed ordering and hence evaluation vectors can be identified to functions on S .
Configurations with Ψ(x) = 0 are outside the domain of GΨ and are not representable
exactly  by  this  exponential  ansatz.   A ϵ-regularisation  yields  approximation  but  not
identity  at  such  points.   From  here  onward,  all  statements  in  this  appendix  concern
pointwise equality on S .

Note that the target log-moduli and phases GΨ(j) and ΩΨ(j) can therefore be associated
with their evaluation vectors evS(GΨ(j)) and evS(ΩΨ(j)), respectively, on the common
support.  To keep the notation compact, we will often interchange the two.
Definition A.1. Let S ∶=⋂Dj=1 suppΨ(j) and fix single-valued phase branches {ΩΨ(j)}Dj=1.
Define the linear modulus and phase spans

                      RG∶= span{1S, evS(GΨ(1)),⋯, evS(GΨ(D))}⊂ R∣S ∣,                    (A.5)
                      RΩ∶= span{1S, evS(ΩΨ(1)),..., evS(ΩΨ(D))}⊂ R∣S ∣,                   (A.6)

where 1S(x)= 1, and define

                                       Rboth∶= span(RG∪ RΩ).                                         (A.7)

Write rG = dimRG, rΩ = dimRΩ  as  the  linear  modulus  and  linear  phase  ranks  respec-
tively, and rboth = dimRboth.
                                                                                                           26

Recall that for the ST-MH ansatz, one has one differentiable trunkfϑ∶ S → Rh×1 which
can be written component-wise as (fϑ,1(x),⋯,fϑ,h(x))⊺.  Here, fϑ,i∶ S → R is scalar at
each x ∈ S  and its evaluation vector evS(fϑ,i) lies in R∣S ∣.  For head k  (k = 1,⋯,K),
real vectors αk,φk ∈ R1×h and scalars βk,γk ∈ R, define the complex vectors

                            χk ∶=αk+ iφk ∈ C1×h  ,  ck ∶=βk+ iγk ∈ C.                           (A.8)

The single-trunk multi-head wave-function of head k is then, for all x∈ S , given by

                                      ψk(x)= exp[χkfϑ(x)+ck].                                       (A.9)

Lemma A.1.  (Affine  rank  bound)  Fix ϑ.   Now  consider  the  real  vectors,  denoted  the
realised  log-moduli, gk ∶= (ln∣ψk(x1)∣,⋯, ln∣ψk(x∣S ∣)∣)⊺ ∈ R∣S ∣×1  for k =  1,⋯,K.   The
affine subspace A∶= aff {g1,⋯,gK}⊂ R∣S ∣×1  has affine dimension at most h+ 1.

Proof.  For each x∈ S , then

                              gk(x)= R[χkfϑ(x)+ck]=αkfϑ(x)+βk.                           (A.10)

Let F∈ Rh×∣S ∣ be a matrix whose (µ,i)-entry is Fµi ∶=fϑ,µ(xi).  Equation (A.10) for all
configurations is then
                                            gk = F⊺α⊺k+βk1S.                                            (A.11)
Choose g1 as origin of the affine space.  For k ≥ 2, then

                                gk−g1 = F⊺(αk−α1)⊺+(βk−β1)1S.                              (A.12)

Because columns of F⊺  live in an h-dimensional linear subspace of R∣S ∣  and 1S  adds
at  most  one  more  dimension,  the  span{gk −g1∣k = 2,⋯,K}  lies  in  a  linear  subspace
L(f)∶= imF⊺+ span{1S} whose dimension dimL(f)≤h+ 1 and hence, dimA≤h+ 1.


Corollary A.1.  (Affine  rank  bound  for  realised  phase  lifts)  Fix ϑ.  For  head k,  write
the realised (unwrapped) phase lift

                              ωk(x)∶= I[χkfϑ(x)+ck]=φkfϑ(x)+γk,                           (A.13)

for  all x ∈ S .  Then dim aff{ω1,⋯,ωK} ≤ h+ 1  where ωi  now  are  represented  by  their
evaluation vectors.

Proof.  Exactly as in Lemma A.1, for F∈ Rh×∣S ∣ with Fµi∶=fϑ,µ(xi), we have F⊺φ⊺k+γk1S .
Hence ωk −ω1 =  F⊺(φk −φ1)⊺ + (γk −γ1)1S .    Thus,  span{ωk −ω1∣k =  2,⋯,K} ⊆
imF⊺+ span{1S}, whose dimension is at most h+ 1.

Remark  A.1.  If  one  records  principal-branch  phases  argψk ∈ (−π,π]∣S ∣,  then  there
exists integer vectors nk ∈ Z∣S ∣ with argψk =ωk− 2πnk.  The family {argψk} need not lie
in a single affine subspace because differentnk may occur.  For capacity and for matching
chosen target branches on S , we work with the liftsωk (or fix single-valued branches), for
which the affine bound above holds and which satisfy eiωk(x) =ψk(x)/∣ψk(x)∣ pointwise.
                                                                                                            27

The  Lemma  and  corollary  above  are  then  a  structural  capacity  statement  for  a  fixed
trunk.  Namely, the set of all realised log-moduli and phases lie in an affine subspace of
dimension at most h+ 1 and thus they quantify how large a family of log-moduli and
phases can a trunk of fixed h represent, irrespective of the targets.
Theorem A.1 (ST-MH representability and minimal width on the common support).
Let the set {Ψ(j)(x)}Dj=1 be a degenerate manifold, and let S  be the common support.  Fix
single-valued phase branches {ΩΨ(j)}Dj=1 on S , and let rboth = dimRboth as in Definition
A.1.  The following are equivalent:
 (i)There exists a single trunk  fϑ∶ S → Rh and linear heads such that ψk(x)= Ψ(k)(x)
     for all k ≤D  and all x∈ S .
(ii) h≥h⋆both =rboth− 1 (equivalently, rboth ≤h+ 1).
In  particular,  the  minimal  width  to  realise  both  the  log-moduli  and  the  phases  with  the
same trunk on S  is h⋆both.

Proof.  Let Rboth  be as defined in Definition A.1.  Since Rboth ⊂ R∣S ∣  and 1S ∈ Rboth,
there exists a basis {1S,b1,⋯,brboth−1} of Rboth.  Now assume rboth ≤ h+ 1 and define
the following (h+ 1)-many vectors

                             u0∶= 1S  ,  ui∶=bi  (i= 1,⋯,rboth− 1).                          (A.14)

where if h+ 1 >rboth, pad with any additional vectors urboth,⋯,uh  from Rboth.  There-
fore, by construction span{u0,⋯,uh} = Rboth, since independence is not required for a
spanning set.  It is always  possible to choose such a spanning set which contains the
constant column 1S .

Since ui  are  vectors,  that  means  that  there  exists  real-valued  functions Ui ∶ S → R
to which their evaluation vector is precisely ui, for all i.  Therefore, we can define the
trunk  on S  by  setting fϑ,i ∶= Ui  where i =  1,⋯,h  and  hence  the  evaluation  vector
of fϑ,i  is  equal  to ui.   Now  write  a  matrix X = [1S fϑ,1 ⋯ fϑ,h] ∈ R∣S ∣×(h+1).   Then,
col(X) = span{u0,⋯,uh} = Rboth.   Consequently,  since  every  target  evaluation  vector
GΨ(j)  and ΩΨ(j)  lies Rboth, then there exist θj = (βj,α⊺j)⊺ and ηj = (γj,φ⊺j)⊺ with

                                    Xθj =GΨ(j)  ,  Xηj ≡ ΩΨ(j).                                   (A.15)

Interpreting these equalities pointwise on S  gives, for all x∈ S ,

                αjfϑ(x)+βj =GΨ(j)(x)  ,  φjfϑ(x)+γj = ΩΨ(j)(x)(mod2π)          (A.16)

Since αjfϑ(x)+βj = ln∣ψj(x)∣ and φjfϑ(x)+γj = argψj(x), then

                    ψj(x)= exp[GΨ(j)(x)+ iΩΨ(j)(x)]= Ψ(j)(x)  (x∈ S),                (A.17)

for all x∈ S .
                                                                                                            28

Lastly, assume, for contradiction, that rboth >h+ 1 and yet there exists a trunk fϑ and
heads withψk = Ψ(k) on S  for allk.  Then both the realised log-moduli and the chosen
phase branches lie in col(X), implying dim col(X)≥rboth.  However, dim col(X)≤h+1,
causing a contradiction.  Therefore, no single trunk of widthh can represent allD states
on S  whenrboth >h+1.  We denote the minimal width required for exact representation
to be h⋆both =rboth− 1.

Corollary   A.2.  Let T  ⊆  S    be   any   non-empty   subset   (e.g.      a   symmetry   or
conservation  law  sector).    Since  evaluation  vectors  can  be  defined  on T1,  define  the
subspaces RG(T),RΩ(T)  and Rboth(T)  now  with  the  evaluation  vectors  restricted  on
T .  Consequently, rboth(T) ≤rboth(S) since the restriction is a linear map that cannot
increase the linear span generated by the (restricted) columns and hence, the dimensions
cannot increase.  Thus, a similar sector-specific representability assertion (following the
same  steps  of  Theorem  A.1)  can  be  done,  yielding  now  representability  criterion  of
h⋆both(T)=rboth(T)− 1.
Remark A.2.  In  general,  for  a  fixed  trunk,  the  realised  log-moduli  and  phases  lie  in
the linear subspace span{1S,fϑ,1,⋯,fϑ,h}.  If the features are all zero, all equal, or some
are constant, this span shrinks and the affine dimension bound in Lemma A.1 becomes
even tighter.  This degeneracy consequently only makes the representation harder.  In the
proof above, we avoid this by choosing features whose evaluation columns form (together
with 1S ) a spanning set of Rboth.  When h+ 1>rboth, we may pad with arbitrary extra
features  (including  zeros).   These  do  not  enlarge  the  column  space  and  do  not  affect
solvability of the linear system.
Remark A.3. Theorem A.1 is a representability result on the finite common support.  It
does not guarantee that any particular neural architecture of widthh can realise the target
functions or that optimisation will find them.  Such statements require extra expressivity
assumptions.  The proof’s assignment offϑ,i =ui is an existence claim which for standard
(e.g.  MLP)  trunks  is  implementable  exactly  on S .  There  is  no  claim  made  regarding
learnability or parameter efficiency.
Remark A.4. Beyond the rank conditionrboth ≤h+1, exact representability also requires
that, after choosing a single-valued branch for each phase function ΩΨ(j), the phases lie
in the same affine span generated by the trunk features and a constant (mod 2π).  This
is an expressivity requirement on fϑ.  On a finite configuration space S , a global branch
can always be selected.  In models with twisted boundary conditions or magnetic flux, the
practical  question  is  whether  those  phases  are  representable  as  affine  functions  of fϑ,
not a topological obstruction.
Therefore, it is shown that using the ST-MH ensemble, one can match allD eigenstates
exactly on S  ifrboth ≤h+1 whererboth is computed from the chosen single-valued phase
branches on S .  Conversely, if rboth >h+ 1, no single-trunk width h can reproduce all
D eigenstates.  This is independent of the head count K (as long as K ≥D).
                                                                                                             29

This failure is independent of the head count, it is simply a feature space bottleneck.
Namely,  all  heads  share  the  same  feature  vector  and  each  head  can  only  take  linear
combinations of those h+ 1-many numbers.  If r > h+ 1,  the set of eigenstate moduli
need more than h+ 1 linearly independent real functions to be written and no amount
of extra heads can create new features, they only reuse the same h+ 1 coordinates.

B. Variational Monte Carlo with penalty term

For any normalisable ψ, define the Born probability pψ(x) as

                              N[ψ]∶=∑                                    N[ψ] ,                             (B.1)
                                         x∈C∣ψ(x)∣2  ,  pψ(x)= ∣ψ(x)∣2
and the local (energy) estimator takes the standard form [47,48]

                                        Eloc,ψ(x)=∑        ˆHxyψ(y)ψ(x).                                         (B.2)
                                                       y∈C

For  some  (Hermitian)  Hamiltonian  ˆH.   Expectation  values  with  respect  to pψ(x)  are
then [47]
                                          ⟨A⟩pψ =∑
                                                    x∈Cpψ(x)A(x).                                           (B.3)
For the ST-MH, the wave functions share a trunk fϑ∶ C→ Rh×1 with ϑ∈ RPT .  For each
head k = 1,⋯,K  choose real vectors and scalars αk,φk ∈ R1×h and βk,γk ∈ R and define
the complex coefficientsχk ∶=αk+iφk ∈ C1×h andck ∶=βk+iγk ∈ C.  The feature vector at
configuration x is then fϑ(x)= (fϑ,1(x),⋯,fϑ,h(x))⊺ ∈ Rh×1.  Note that in the complex-
parameter case, whenever a derivative acts onψ∗k, the corresponding log-derivative must
be complex conjugated.  We therefore adopt this convention below.

Given the above, the head-k wave-function then takes the form

                                      ψk(x)= exp[χkfϑ(x)+ck].                                       (B.4)

Consider  now  the  head  parameters.    For  component αkµ  with µ =  1,⋯,h,  the  log
derivative is
                                         ∂αkµ lnψk(x)=fϑ,µ(x).                                          (B.5)
Similarly,   one   can   compute   the   remaining   log   derivatives   as ∂βk lnψk(x)  =   1,
∂φkµ lnψk(x) =  ifϑ,µ(x)  and ∂γk lnψk(x) =  i.   For  the  trunk  parameters,  one  writes
the Jacobian
                                  ∂ϑifϑ(x)= (∂ϑifϑ,1(x),⋯,∂ϑifϑ,h)⊺.                                 (B.6)
All together, the log derivative vectors take the form

                                         Ok ∶=∇θ(h)
                                                   k   lnψk(x)∈ CPH,                                      (B.7)
                                      (Oik)⊺(x)∶=∂ϑi lnψk(x)∈ C.                                      (B.8)
                                                                                                           30

The energy expectation of head-k is straight-forward.  Namely,

                               Ek ∶= ⟨ψk, ˆHψk⟩N[ψk]  =∑
                                                      x∈Cpψk(x)Eloc,ψk(x).                              (B.9)
To compute the gradient of Ek, let P  be any arbitrary head parameter.  Then

                                    ∂PEk =∂P∑
                                                 x∈Cpψk(x)Eloc,ψk(x).                                   (B.10)
where

                         ∂Ppψk(x)= 2R[(Ok,P(x)−⟨Ok,P(x)⟩k)pψk(x)],                     (B.11)
                         ∂PEloc,ψk =∑       ˆHxy(Ok,P(y)− Ok,P(x))ψk(y)
                                        y∈C                               ψk(x).                         (B.12)

Taking the expectation and separating the real part gives an identity akin to the one
obtained in the case of a single network [47,48]

                      ∂PEk = 2R[⟨(Ok,P −⟨Ok,P⟩pψk)∗(Eloc,ψk−Ek)⟩pψk].                  (B.13)

For now a shared trunk parameter ϑi, the same algebra applies.  One simply replaces
Ok,P→ (Oik)⊺.  Hence,

                    ∂ϑiEk = 2R[⟨((Oik)⊺−⟨(Oik)⊺⟩pψk)∗(Eloc,ψk−Ek)⟩                     ].                (B.14)
                                                                                   pψk

Where thex dependence is implied.  The cost function now also includes an overlap and
orthogonality  penalty  term  as  shown  in  equation  (15)  (there  for  the  case  of  MT-MH
NQS ensembles).  Define the unnormalised overlaps as Σkl =∑x∈Cψ∗k(x)ψl(x).  Letting
Nk ∶= Σkk, then
                                              σkl∶=    Σkl√NkNl.                                               (B.15)

Now,  for some head parameter P ∈ θ(h)k   ,  a straightforward calculation shows that the
derivatives take the form
                               √
                     ∂Pσkl =       Nk                                    ∗ ψl(x)        .                 (B.16)
                                   Nl ⟨(Ok,P(x)−⟨Ok,P(x)⟩pψk)              ψk(x)⟩pψk

On  the  other  hand,  for  some  trunk  parameter ϑi,  both ψl(x)  and ψk(x)  vary,  and
symmetrising gives
                    √  Nk                                        ∗ ψl(x)
         ∂ϑiσkl =       Nl ⟨((Oik)⊺(x)−⟨(Oik)⊺(x)⟩pψk)             ψk(x)⟩       +(k↔l).            (B.17)
                                                                            pψk
                                                                                                          31

Now, for the penalty P =  12∑k≠l∣σkl∣2, and for any parameter P , then


                            ∂PP = R[∑
                                         k≠lσ∗kl(⟨O∗k,P⟩kl−σkl⟨O∗k,P⟩kk)],                          (B.18)
where                                        √
                               ⟨O∗k,P⟩kl∶=       Nk                                                  (B.19)
                                                 Nl ⟨O∗k,P(x)ψl(x)ψk(x)⟩pψk

Thus for the full cost function, given some ensemble weightswk such that∑kwk = 1 and
a penalty strength λ, then for a head parameter P ∈θ(h)k

                                        ∂PC =wk∂PEk+λ∂PP,                                        (B.20)

where one uses equations (B.13) and (B.18).  For a shared trunk parameter ϑi, then

                                               K
                                     ∂ϑiC =   ∑
                                              k=1wk∂ϑiEk+λ∂ϑiP,                                     (B.21)
where one uses equation (B.18) with Ok,P → (Oik)⊺  and equation (B.14) for the trunk
derivatives of the energy.

C. Optimisation and sampling protocol for ST-MH NQS ensembles

In what follows, we adopt the notation of Appendix B.  Namely for a given configuration
x∈ C, the ST-MH NQS ensemble reads

                                     ψk(x)= exp[χkfϑ(x)+ck],                                       (C.1)

whereby χk ∈ C1×h,ck ∈ C and fϑ∶ C→ Rh×1.  We further let ℓk(x)∶= lnψk(x).

C.1.  Sampling

For sampling, we use two complementary modes for estimating the energies and overlaps.
The first is per-head  sampling, where for each head k, we run an independent Markov
chain targeting qk(x)∶=pψk(x) and form simple average over i.i.d.  or thinned samples
xi ∼qk.  This maximises effective sample size (ESS) per head, but yields head-specific
supports.  The second mode is a  shared-mixture  sampling (self-normalised importance
sampling, SNIS) where a single chain targets the uniform (unnormalised) mixture

                                                       K
                                      qmix(x)∶=  1K    ∑
                                                      m=1∣ψm(x)∣2,                                        (C.2)
and self-normalised importance weights for head k are

                                                              S
                                  ωk,i∝ ∣ψk(xi)∣2qmix(xi)  , ∑
                                                             i=1ωk,i = 1.                                    (C.3)
                                                                                                              32

Note that normalising constants cancel both in acceptance ratios and in the normalised
weights, thus no explicit per-head factors Nm are needed in the mixture.  The per-head
ESS is then
                                          ESSk =     1∑iω2k,i ∈ [1,S].                                           (C.4)

This mixture sampling ensures that all heads see the union of supports from all states,
especially early in training, which stabilises overlaps and orthogonality pressure.

C.2.  Estimators and cost

For head k, the Rayleigh quotient is estimated via local energies as
                                 ⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩1
                           ˆEk =   S∑Si=1E(k)loc (xi)   ,xi ∼qk(per-head)
                                   ∑Si=1ωk,iE(k)loc (xi)  ,xi ∼qmix(mixture).                        (C.5)

The normalised overlaps use the ratio form shown in Appendix B.  With

                                  Lkl(x)∶=ℓl(x)−ℓk(x)= ln ψl(x)ψk(x),                                  (C.6)

an estimator of σkl is
                                    ⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩1
                              ˆσkl =   S∑Si=1 exp[Lkl(xi)]   ,xi ∼qk,
                                      ∑Si=1ωk,i exp[Lkl(xi)]  ,xi ∼qmix.                             (C.7)

Collecting ˆσkl for all pairs forms the empirical overlap matrix σ ∈ CK×K.

The  ratio  form  in  (C.7)  is  unbiased  for  the  unnormalised  quantity  Σkl/Nk,  not  for
the normalised overlap σkl = Σkl/√NkNl.  In particular,
                                                                      √    Nl
                                 Eqk [exp[Lkl(x)]]= ΣklNk =σkl            Nk,                                (C.8)

and the mixture variant to approximate the same expectation under qmix  inherits this
scaling.   This  surrogate  is  therefore  asymmetric  in (k,l)  and  scale  sensitive  to  the
norms Nk  and  indeed  is  a  biased  estimator  of  the  normalised  overlaps.   In  practice,
two design choices made this surrogate behave well in our simulations:  (i) we anneal
λ gently such  that  heads approach  the degenerate  manifold before strongly  imposing
orthogonality pressure, and (ii) the per-sample coefficients used in the penalty include a
normalisation-correction (see section C.3 below) on the sampling head that discourages
trivial rescaling.  For all reported results, we validate by recomputing exact, normalised
overlaps post-training  (via full enumeration for the small systems), which removes any
residual ambiguity due to scaling.  The post-training results indeed support the results
obtained during the training.
                                                                                                            33


We optimise the weighted energy plus an orthogonal penalty cost

                                             K
                                  C(Θ)=     ∑
                                            k=1wk ˆEk(Θ)+λP(ˆσ(Θ)),                                  (C.9)
where∑kwk = 1.  In practice, we found the Frobenius penalty
                            P(σ)= ∥σ− 1K∥2F =∑
                                                       k ∣σkk− 1∣2+∑k≠l∣σkl∣2.                          (C.10)
convenient as it treats diagonal corrections and off-diagonals uniformly and mirrors di-
agnostics used post-optimisation.  A linear anneal of the penalty strengthλ from a small
value to its final value helps heads approach the degenerate manifold before enforcing
strict orthogonality.

Note that in Appendix B,  an equivalent off-diagonal penalty   12∑k≠l∣σkl∣2  is used,  and
switching  between  that  and  equation  (C.10)  only  modifies  small  diagonal  terms  and
corresponding gradients in a straightforward manner.

C.3.  Gradients

The standard VMC identities from Appendix B yield the standard gradients shown in
equations (B.13) and (B.14) whereby now, the expectations are taken with respect to
qk (per-head) or as SNIS reweighted expectations under qmix.

For the overlap penalty (C.10), differentiate through the estimator ˆσkl in (C.7).  Let
                              rkl(x)∶=eLkl(x) /Leftr⫯g⊸tl⫯ne⇒ˆσkl =∑
                                                                i  ˜ωk,irkl(xi),                           (C.11)
where                                        ⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
                                               1
                                      ˜ωk,i =  S     ,  xi ∼qk,
                                               ωk,i   ,  xi ∼qmix.                                     (C.12)
Now define the convenient product
                                            Wkl,i∶= ˆσklrkl(xi).                                             (C.13)
Then the stochastic gradient contributions that match the Appendix B for the surro-
gate  (C.7)  form  up-to  the  ratio-estimator  scaling  under  importance  sampling  can  be
expressed via per-sample coefficients and accumulated across samples/heads.

Specifically, because heads share the trunk fϑ, one can assemble the full stochastic gra-
dient from a single reverse-mode sweep through the trunk by forming a scalar function
whose gradient equals the gradient of the cost.  Concretely, let
                       F(Θ)=∑          k,i,reR[ℓk(xi)]+c(E)k,i,imI[ℓk(xi)]]
                                 k,i [c(E)
                                  +∑         kl,i,reR[ℓk(xi)]+c(P)kl,i,imI[ℓk(xi)]],                   (C.14)
                                    k≠l∑i [c(P)
                                                                                                                  34

such  that ∇ΘF(Θ) = ∇ΘC(Θ).   This  implies  that  with  the  estimator Ek  of  the  form
(C.5), and weights ˜ωk,i ∈ {1/S,ωk,i}, then

                                       c(E)k,i,re = 2R[E(k)loc (xi)−  ˆEk]˜ωk,i,                                   (C.15)
                                      c(E)k,i,im = 2I[E(k)loc (xi)−  ˆEk]˜ωk,i.                                    (C.16)

For  the  penalty  term,  a  choice  of  per-sample  coefficients  that  matches  the  unbiased
gradient of (C.10) under the estimator (C.7) is

                                           c(P)kl,i,re =λ˜ωk,iR[Wkl,i],                                          (C.17)
                                           c(P)kl,i,im =−λ˜ωk,iI[Wkl,i],                                        (C.18)

for head l and

                                    c(P)kk,i,re =λ˜ωk,i(2R[Wkl,i]− 2∣ˆσkl∣2),                                (C.19)
                                   c(P)kk,i,im =λ˜ωk,iI[Wkl,i],                                                   (C.20)

for head k, for all k ≠l.  The diagonal terms from ∥σ− 1K∥2F  are handled analogously.

We  note  that  our  use  of  a  biased  estimator  of  the  normalised  overlaps,  as  shown  in
(C.7), dictates a modification of the single-pass function F .  Namely, differentiating the
normalisation in σkl,  the √Nk  factor contributes a constant centring term for head k
which shows up in the per-sampling coefficient as −2∣ˆσkl∣2.  This counters the tendency
to reduce rkl  by merely inflating Nk.  Empirically,  this steers optimisation toward re-
ducing the numerator Σkl of the normalised overlap (hence genuine orthogonality), not
just reweighing norms.  Finally, we note that an unbiased estimator for such normalised
overlaps  can  be  in  principle  constructed,  without  the  general  scheme  of  the  training
protocol mentioned here being affected.

Given  the  above,  a  single  call  to  reverse-mode  automatic  differentiation  accumulates
contributions from all heads through the shared trunk.  In contrast, an MT-MH ensem-
ble requires K separate backward passes (one per trunk).

C.4.  Orthogonality residuals
One  diagnostic  we  use  during  and  after  training  is  the  Frobenius  norm  of  the  head-
overlap matrix.  In what follows, we heuristically quantify an acceptable range for resid-
ual fluctuations in the Frobenius norm during training.

During training, two effects dominate residual fluctuations.  Namely:
   ●  Monte Carlo noise:  each entry ˆσkl is a sample mean (per-head) or a self-normalised
      weighted mean (mixture).  For xi ∼qk and S effective samples, then

                                    Var[ˆσkl]≈ vklS  ,  vkl = Varqk[rkl(x)].                         (C.21)
                                                                                                                  35

      Under the mixture approach with normalised weights, lets2kl =∑iωk,i∣rkl(xi)− ˆσkl∣2.
      A large-sample approximation then gives

                                                  Var[ˆσkl]≈ s2klESSk.                                          (C.22)

      Aggregating  entries  (treating  them  as  approximately  independent  at  large  batch
      size), the expected squared Frobenius error admits the crude estimate

                                      E[∥σ− 1K∥2F]≈∑            s2kk           s2kl

                                                            k  ESSk +∑k≠l    ESSk.                           (C.23)

      This motivates a simulation-specific tolerance band
                                                        ⌟roo⟪⟪op
                                                        ⌟roo⟪mo⟨s2kl
                                                   τ ∶= ⌟roo⟪mo⟨⌟roo⟪⟨o⟪∑
                                                            k≠l ESSk.                                          (C.24)

      That is, one declares orthogonality within Monte Carlo error if ∣∣σ− 1K∣∣2F ≲ 2τ.
   ●  Stochastic-approximation  drift:   because λ  is  annealed  and  gradients  are  noisy,
      the  target σ(Θ)  moves  over  iterations.   Brief  rebounds  of  the  Frobenius  norm
      were observed in optimisation to commonly coincide with dips in the ESSk, head
      trajectories crossing nodal surfaces, or when a stronger λ trades a tiny energy gain
      for  a  modest  overlap  increase.   These  effects  are  transient  and  predicted  by  the
      ESS-based band in (C.23) above.

D. Simulation parameters for full space resolution tests


   Table  D1:        The  simulation  parameters  used  during  all  the  simulations.   Here, N  is  the
   number of sites in the chain, η is the learning rate, n is the number of optimisation steps,
   NMC is the number of samples used in the Metropolis-Hastings sampler, NC is the number
   of  chains, λs  is  the  starting  penalty  strength  factor, λf  is  the  final  penalty  factor  after
   annealing, nλ is the number of steps over which the penalty strength is annealed and h is
   the trunk width.

                        N    η    n  NMC NC   λs   λf  nλ  h
                        4     1 × 10−3   1000    512      8     1 × 10−3    0.5    200    32
                      4(B)   1 × 10−3   3000   1024     8    1 × 10−11   0.5   1600    2
                      4(C)   1 × 10−3   2500   1024     8     1 × 10−8    1.5   1200    4
                        6     1 × 10−3   1000    512      8     1 × 10−3    0.5    200    64
                        8     1 × 10−3   1000    512      8     1 × 10−3    0.5    200    64