Meson properties and symmetry emergence based on
the deep neural network





Xin Tong,a Wei Feng,b Weiwei Xu,c,d Chao-Hsi Chang,e,f  Guo-Li Wang,g  Qiang Li1a

aSchool of Physical Science and Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072,
  China
 bSchool  of  Information  Mechanics  and  Sensing  Engineering,  Xidian  University,  Xi’an,  710071,
  China
 cShandong Institute of Advanced Technology, 250100, Jinan, China

dShandong University, 250100, Jinan, China

eCAS  Key  Laboratory  of  Theoretical  Physics,  Institute  of  Theoretical  Physics,  Chinese  Academy
  of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
fSchool of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

gDepartment of Physics, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China

  E-mail:liruo@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract:As a key property of hadrons, the total width is quite difficult to obtain in
theory due to the extreme complexity of the strong and electroweak interactions.  In this
work, a deep neural network model with the Transformer architecture is built to precisely
predict meson widths in the range of 10−14 ∼625 MeV based on meson quantum numbers
and  masses.   The  relative  errors  of  the  predictions  are  0.12%,2.0%, and  0.54%  in  the
training set, the test set, and all the data, respectively.  We present the predicted meson
width  spectra  for  the  currently  discovered  states  and  some  theoretically  predicted  ones.
The model is also used as a probe to study the quantum numbers and inner structures for
some undetermined states including the exotic states.  Notably, this data-driven model is
investigated to spontaneously exhibit good charge conjugation symmetry and approximate
isospin symmetry consistent with physical principles.  The results indicate that the deep
neural network can serve as an independent complementary research paradigm to describe
and  explore  the  hadron  structures  and  the  complicated  interactions  in  particle  physics
alongside the traditional experimental measurements, theoretical calculations, and lattice
simulations.

Keywords:Meson width predictions; Hadron identification; Deep neural network; Sym-
metry emergence












   1Corresponding author
Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Meson encoding methods and data enhancement                                      4
    2.1    Features used to denote the mesons                                                           4
            2.1.1    Quark contents encoding                                                                     5
            2.1.2    Complete input features                                                                6
    2.2    Gaussian Monte Carlo data enhancement                                                            7

3   Deep neural network model                                                                    9
    3.1    Backbone of the model                                                                                     9
    3.2    Loss function to describe the meson widths                                              11
    3.3    Training and validation                                                                          11

4   Numerical results of the meson width predictions                   12
    4.1    Overall performance of the model                                                                   12
    4.2    Meson width predictions and quantum numbers identification             15
    4.3    Analysis of quark content encoding                                                                   17
    4.4    Symmetries reproduced by the neural network                                              20
            4.4.1    Charge conjugation symmetry                                                  20
            4.4.2    Isospin symmetry                                                                     22

5   Summary and outlook                                                                            24

A  Spectra of the predicted meson widths                                           27





1    Introduction

Particle physics aims to understand the essence of fundamental particles and their inter-
actions in nature.  Quarks and gluons are bound by strong interactions to form hadrons,
namely, mesons and baryons.  Due to quark confinement [1,2], hadron properties play key
roles in understanding the strong interactions, which are directly determined by the dy-
namics of quarks and gluons inside.  The strong interactions are described by the quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). In the high-energy region (short distance), QCD’s perturbation
calculations have achieved great success, and its theoretical predictions are highly consis-
tent  with  experimental  results,  which  becomes  one  of  the  most  important  experimental
verifications of the Standard Model for particle physics.  However,  in the low-energy re-
gion (long distance), the non-perturbative effects of QCD make analytical calculations quite
difficult, which leads to making predictions of hadron lifetimes quite difficult in theory.




                                                           – 1 –
     Mesons  as  the  quark-antiquark  bound  states  play  important  roles  for  studying  the
non-perturbative QCD interactions.  The meson masses and decay widths are hence direct
reflections of the internal interaction dynamics.  Generally speaking, the total width of a
meson  is  a  summation  of  all  the  possible  decay  channels,  while  the  decay  behaviors  are
directly dependent on the meson quantum numbers and the involved interactions.  Research
on mass spectra and total widths provides rich information on the internal structure and
interactions of mesons.
     There exist two main goals in hadron physics.  One is to obtain the hadron mass and
decay behaviors based on the quantum numbers, while the other is to obtain the quantum
numbers from the observed mass and lifetime (or total width equivalently).  With the QCD-
inspired potentials and quark model, by solving the corresponding bound states equation,
mass spectra for traditional hadrons can be well established in theory [3–5] though some
exotic  hadrons  discovered  in  recent  years  are  not  included [6–10].   However,  it  is  quite
difficult to obtain the total widths based on the traditional calculations of Standard Model
dynamics for the extreme theoretical complications.  Hence it is quite necessary and helpful
to predict lifetime spectra from a new reliable method.
     In recent years, with the continuous operation of high-precision experiments such as
LHCb, CMS, ATLAS, Belle II, and BESIII, significant progress has been achieved in hadron
spectroscopy  research,  and  a  large  number  of  new  hadron  states  have  been  discovered
including quite a lot of exotic state candidates [11].  These new discoveries greatly enrich
our  understanding  of  the  hadron  family,  but  at  the  same  time  pose  a  serious  challenge
to the current theoretical framework.  The internal structures, quantum numbers, masses,
and decay widths of many particles have not yet been fully determined [6–12].  Therefore,
systematic research on the meson spectra, especially reliable predictions for the total widths
has become quite an important problem in hadron physics.  All these challenges mentioned
above highlight the necessity of exploring alternative data-driven methods.
     On the other hand, deep learning allows computational models that are composed of
multiple processing layers to learn representations of data with multiple levels of abstrac-
tion [13].  In the last ten years the deep neural networks have become a powerful paradigm
for many complex problems since several key breakthroughs happened in this field.  The ap-
plication of back-propagation algorithm laid the theoretical foundation for effectively train-
ing neural networks [14].  Then a series of powerful architectures have made great achieve-
ments in computer science areas, such as the recurrent neural network (RNN) [15,16], the
long short-term memory network (LSTM) [17] and neural probabilistic representation [18]
for  natural  language  and  other  sequential  data  processing,  and  the  convolutional  neural
network (CNN) [19] for image recognition.  The residual networks (ResNet) overcame the
bottleneck of gradient vanishing in deep networks, making it more effective to construct
and train extremely deep networks [20].  This series of advancements ultimately gave birth
to the Transformer architecture, which is considered as the most advanced and powerful
architecture characterized by its self-attention mechanism [21].
     Currently the deep neural networks have also become a powerful paradigm for solving
complex problems in high energy physics [22–27].  Its core capability lies in extracting phys-
ical information from high-dimensional complex experimental data, which is applied in par-




                                                      – 2 –
ticle track reconstruction [28], jets classification [29–31], the search for new physics [32,33],
and mass spectra of atomic nuclei and hadrons [34–37], etc.  Other data-driven paradigms
have also shown great potential.  The symbolic regression has been applied to explicitly de-
termine the global behavior of the QCD strong coupling constant [38], and physics-informed
neural networks have been employed to analyze chromoelectric flux tubes [39]. These works,
together with deep learning approaches for hadron spectroscopy,  illustrate that machine
learning is becoming a versatile tool for addressing diverse problems in strong interaction
physics.
     Encouraged by these advances,  several recent researches have also begun to directly
focus on meson width topic.  A deep neural network (DNN) model has been developed to
predict mass and width of meson states [40];  another work compared the performance of
various  machine  learning  algorithms  on  this  problem [41].   These  studies  have  validated
the  feasibility  of  data-driven  approaches  on  this  issue,  but  they  also  face  several  core
challenges that constrain their development, for example, the performance of deep learning
models is highly dependent on accurate hadron encoding and large-scale datasets,  while
the experimental hadron data is relatively sparse and there also exists a large number of
degeneracy.  This work aims to systematically explore a data enhancement strategy based
on physical principles, and examine whether a deep neural network model trained in this
way can successfully predict the meson widths and further reveal the underlying physical
symmetries behind the data.  To this end, we have developed a deep learning framework
that starts with a systematic feature engineering approach to address meson encoding.  The
framework adopts the Feature Tokenizer Transformer (FT-Transformer) architecture [42] as
the core model and enhances the data by the Gaussian Monte-Carlo method to effectively
train the model and improve its robustness.
     The trained model demonstrates strong predictive ability within a huge range spanning
nearly 17 orders of magnitude, from about 10−14   MeV to about 625 MeV. The relative er-
ror  on  an  unprecedented  conventional  meson  test  set  reaches  the  level  of  one  percent,
demonstrating excellent generalization performance.  And we further verified the physical
consistency of the model.  Our research shows that this data-driven model can successfully
reproduce the fundamental symmetry in particle physics without any prior physical con-
straints.  The predicted results not only strictly follow the charge conjugation symmetry,
but also quantitatively reflect the approximate isospin symmetry for meson widths.
     In addition, the model exhibits different response to particles with different internal
structures, which also provides us a new insight to explore hadrons.  We find that although
the model is able to learn the patterns of traditional mesons and some exotic states con-
tained in the training data, its predictions exhibit significant biases to the well-known exotic
state candidates such asD ∗s0 (2317) andχ   c1 (3872).  It then suggests that these states may
have different internal structures than the particles in the training set, which also suggests
that the model’s predictions may serve as a data-driven probe to assist in identifying and
classifying potential non-traditional hadron states.
     This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.   In  Section2,  we  first  state  the  used  data,  data
enhancement method, and the data encoding scheme.  Then in Section3we introduce the
neural network model we used to deal with the meson width problems, the loss function,




                                                     – 3 –
the train methods and also the hyper parameters.  The obtained results, predictions, and
discussions are presented in Section4.  Finally we give a brief summary and outlook.

2    Meson encoding methods and data enhancement

In  a  prediction  task  based  on  a  deep  neural  network,  the  performance  of  the  model  is
highly dependent on the quality of the input data and representation of the data features.
In  this  section,  we  introduce  the  complete  procedure  of  data  processing  for  the  meson
width predictions.  First, we construct a complete feature vector which can definitely and
precisely represent quantum states of mesons; and then, we explore a data enhancement
strategy to solve the important issue of limited data for deep learning.

2.1    Features used to denote the mesons

A particle is represented by a set of quantum numbers, such as spinJ, parityP, charge
conjugationC,G,  isospinIand  its  third  componentI                                                 3,  the  quark  contents,  mass  and
total width (or lifetime equivalently).  These quantum numbers will also be called features
within  the  machine  learning  terminology.   The  non-relativistic  quantum  numbers,  inner
spinSand orbital angular momentumL, are often used to denote the mesons in literature,
however, these two are neither good quantum numbers in describing the particles nor the
physical observables in experiments.  We will not use the non-relativisticSandLas the
meson features to train the model.
     According to the conventions in deep learning, we categorize the aforementioned fea-
tures into two groups.  One group describing the inner symmetry of the mesons consists
of the categorical features, including theP,CandG; and the other group consists of the
numerical features, including theI,I          3,J, and the quark flavor coefficients.  The features in
the former one are assumed to be numerical-independent and different values just indicate
different categories, while the latter ones are assumed to be numerical-dependent.  It should
be pointed out that the above category scheme is not rigorous.
     Also, for some mesons, the information of the experimental data is not complete while
some  quantum  numbers  may  be  missing.   We  apply  the  following  scheme  to  deal  with
the case of missing features.  For the categorical features, the inapplicable features and the
undetermined features are considered as two different independent discrete features respec-
tively, for example, the values ofC-parity forπ             + (inapplicable) andX(4160) (undetermined
currently) are assigned as two different categorical labels.  For the numerical features, we
developed a dual-path embedding framework that decouples a feature’s value from its cer-
tainty.   We  first  transform  the  original  numerical  valuex        num  into  a  number-mask  pair
as                                            ((0,0)             undetermined
                         (x ′num,xmask) =                      x                                 num,
                                                (x  num,1)       otherwise.                                                       (2.1)
Then every numerical feature is coupled with an independent feature which gives the un-
determined data a specific mask value 0 to distinguish it from the usual sample.  This pair
is  then  processed  by  an  augmented  embedding  module.   Namely,  the  embedding  of  this




                                                       – 4 –
number-mask pair will then be fed into a linear layer to give ad-dimensional fused feature
vector which encodes both the value and its certainty.



2.1.1    Quark contents encoding

The first challenge in using neural networks to deal with the hadron spectroscopy is the
encoding of quark contents inside hadrons.  Within the traditional quark model, mesons
consist  of  a  quark-antiquark  pair.   A  direct  encoding  scheme  is  to  use  a  10-dimensional
binary vector to represent the five quarks and the corresponding antiquarks, namely, quark
contents can be expressed as

                                          q= (u,¯u,d,         ¯d,s,¯s,c,¯c,b,         ¯b),                                         (2.2)

where theith elementq    i  = 1 denotes that the corresponding quark exists in the meson
whileq    i  = 0 not; we did not take into account the (anti)top quark.  However, this naive
binary  encoding  cannot  describe  the  mesons  in  flavor  superposition  states.   The  quark
content  of  many  neutral  mesons  is  a  superposition  of  several  quark-antiquark  pairs,  for
example, the flavor wave function of neutral pion is usually expressed as    1√2(u¯u−d           ¯d).  In
order to represent the information of these flavor superposition states, we directly pass the
corresponding flavor coefficients into the quark content vectorq, for example, theπ                   0 and
ηare encoded as

                                    qπ0 = (  1√2,   1√2,   1√2,   1√2,0,0,0,0,0,0),                                  (2.3)
                                  qη = (  1√6,   1√6,   1√6,   1√6,   2√6,   2√6,0,0,0,0).                                (2.4)

Notice that here we only care about the absolute values of the coefficients which are aimed
to reflect the weights of the corresponding quarks inside the mesons.  It is important to
clarify that the physical information carried by the relative phase (such as the distinction
betweenρ       0  andω)  is  not  lost  within  the  current  flavor  encoding  scheme;  instead,  it  is
intrinsically  related  to  the  input  quantum  numbersIandI               3,  for  example,I        ρ  =  1  and
Iω=0.  For complex mixed states where phase assignment is ambiguous (e.g.,η-η    ′ mixing),
the model relies on the mass features and other quantum numbers for differentiation.  This
encoding scheme ensures that the model receives sufficient discriminative information while
maintaining numerical stability.  However, it should be pointed out the fact that the quark
coefficients are not good quantum numbers in experiments.  The PDG only gives a universal
flavor representation [c 1(u¯u+d           ¯d) +c      2s¯s] for the light unflavored mesons withI= 0.  It
is  worth  further  studying  a  more  effective  and  accurate  encoding  scheme  for  the  quark
contents.
     This encoding scheme for the quark contents can simplify the structure of the input
features,  and  then  the  task  for  grasping  deep  symmetry  information  of  the  mesons  can
then be finished by the deep neural network with powerful self-attention mechanism.  The
encoding scheme can be naturally extensible to multiquark states.  For instance, the fully




                                                         – 5 –
charmed tetraquark candidateT        c¯c1    (3900)+ is represented by

                                  qTc¯c1     (3900)+ = (1,0,0,1,0,0,1,1,0,0),                                 (2.5)

where the four non-zero entries correspond to theu,         ¯d,cand ¯cquarks, respectively.  The
encoding scheme can uniformly process conventional mesons and exotic states within the
same feature space.

2.1.2    Complete input features
Another  challenge  is  that  the  aforementioned  quantum  numbers  cannot  definitely  and
uniquely represent a particle state.  Several hadrons may share the same quantum numbers
(J,P,C,G,I,I  3) and quark contents but correspond to different masses and widths.  There
is  degeneracy  if  we  just  use  the  features  above.   For  example,ρ(770)  andρ(1450)  share
exactly the same quantum numbersI   G(J PC) = 1+(1−−) and quark contents [u  ¯d] but have
quite different masses and widths.  If these degenerate features were used as input, it would
lead to the one-to-many ambiguous mappings and lower the performance of the model.
     Within the quark model, these ambiguities may originate from several aspects.  On the
one hand, different principal quantum numbers cause different particle masses, such asJ/ψ,
ψ(2S),ψ(3770),ψ(4040),ψ(4160),ψ(4260),ψ(4360), andψ(4415),ψ(4660).  Theψfamily
mesons all share the sameJ    PC = 1−− and quark content [c¯c].  Although the usual principal
quantum numbernmay be used to label different states, there are several reasons prevent
us using this feature.  First,nis a non-relativistic, model-dependent quantity;  second,n
is not a directly experimental observable;  and finally,  it is difficult to precisely establish
all  the  principal  quantum  numbers  of  these  mesons,  since  there  may  also  exist  the  so-
called  2S-1D,  3S-2D,  ...,  mixing  effects,  namely,  even  the  non-good  principal  quantum
numbernis  missing  for  most  mesons.   On  the  other  hand,  the  unnatural  parity  (J    P  =
1+,2−,3 +,···) mesons also have the extra inner freedom which makes the corresponding
masses undetermined from the current features, for example, theJ   P  = 1+ charmed mesons
D1(2420) andD       1(2430), and the charmed-strange meosonD      s1 (2536) andD   s1 (2460). These
mesons are usually considered as the two physical states from the non-relativistic  1LL-3LL
mixing, and are distinguished by an extra introduced mixing angle parameter.  However,
this parameter is also a model-dependent quantity and cannot be directly measured from
experiments.   Hence  a  definite  quantum  number  is  also  missing  to  represent  the  inner
freedom of unnatural parity mesons, which makes it impossible to determine the masses
and widths together for such mesons from a set of good quantum numbers.
     All these ambiguities make it difficult to directly use the aforementioned features to
train a deep neural network model to predict the meson masses and widths.  On the other
hand,  the meson mass spectra can be well obtained by the quark model calculations [3],
and a more urgent and difficult problem is to calculate the meson widths.  Then the mass
itself can behave as a powerful input feature and be used to solve the degenerate issues
above.  Compared to the total width, the meson masses are much easier to obtain based
on the quark model calculations or the lattice QCD simulations,  which has also become
part  of  the  motivation  to  predict  the  meson  widths  while  not  the  masses.   Notice  here




                                                       – 6 –
we do not distinguish the molecular states or the compact tetraquark ones for the exotic
states with the same definite quantum numbers.  The different interpretation pictures are
model-dependent and are not experimental observable good quantum numbers, and hence
will not be used as the input features for neural network.  All the differences of widths for
those states are attributed to the mass differences.
     Additionally, we also introduce an auxiliary featureNwith continuous values to rep-
resent the mass ordering, which is defined by normalizing the central value of the meson
mass withm    π0.  Then the featureNbehaves as an extensible relative one and any new
discovered meson can be easily embedded into this system.  Notice thatNis not an inde-
pendent feature but an auxiliary feature derived from the meson mass, designed to help
the model better interpret the mass spectrum.  Finally, we can encode a meson by a feature
vector as

                          v= (J,P,C,G,I,I    3,u,¯u,d,      ¯d,s,¯s,c,¯c,b,         ¯b,m,N).                        (2.6)

And our aim is to use the above feature vectorvto predict the meson total width Γ based
on the deep neural network.
     The theoretical feasibility of applying deep neural networks to predict meson widths is
supported by the Universal Approximation Theorem [43–45], which says that a deep neural
network  with  sufficient  complexity  can  approximate  any  function  to  arbitrary  accuracy.
Physically,  the  meson  width  is  uniquely  determined  by  its  mass  and  the  complete  set
of quantum numbers, which encode the selection rules governing possible decay channels.
The representations of different particles in feature space are fundamentally distinct, which
then provide necessary discriminative information for the neural network.  Here we take the
π0 andπ  ± as an example to show the relation between the feature representation and the
meson quantum numbers. Specifically,π  0 is encoded withI         3 = 0, the definiteC-parity (C=
+1),  and  the  mixed  quark  flavorπ    0  =    1√2(u¯u−d           ¯d);  in  contrast,π    ±  are  encoded  with
I3 =±1, a distinct flavor (u        ¯d)/(d¯u), and a categorical embedding indicating thatC-parity
is not applicable.  The definiteC-parity permits electromagnetic decay while charged light
mesons are restricted to weak decays.  The neural network can then learn this non-linear
mapping from the training data to predict the width property.  The differences in the input
quantum numbers essentially define and determine the three states. These features are fully
sufficient to distinguish the three states.  On the other hand, the Universal Approximation
Theorem guarantees that a sufficiently deep neural network can approximate this complex
mapping,  enabling  the  deep  neural  network  to  predict  the  meson  widths  bypassing  the
difficulties of direct non-perturbative QCD calculations.

2.2    Gaussian Monte Carlo data enhancement
The  data  used  for  training  and  testing  in  this  work  are  from  the  experimental  meson
data in PDG 2024 and 2025 update [11], which include 400 mesons.  The most important
challenge for this task is the lack of data.  Though more than 400 mesons have been dis-
covered in experiments, the dataset is still quite small for training a deep neural network
with good generalization ability.  To overcome the bottleneck of data sparsity, data aug-




                                                      – 7 –
mentation is considered an effective strategy.  There are two main implementation paths in
machine learning: one is to use deep generative models to learn and generate new synthetic
samples [46]; the second is to generate physically reasonable pseudo-data by Monte-Carlo
sampling of experimental data.  The latter one can expand the limited datasets and also
improve model robustness.  Therefore, it is widely used in particle physics, nuclear physics,
and astrophysics [47–51].  These two paths provide complementary perspectives for address-
ing data sparsity issues.
     To overcome this problem, we implement the Gaussian Monte-Carlo data enhancement
based on the uncertainties of experimental data in this work.  The experimental measure-
ment  of  a  meson  massmis  always  accompanied  by  the  experimental  uncertainties  ∆m
from  both  statistical  and  systematic  errors,  which  in  turn  define  the  confidence  interval
of the corresponding experimental data.  The core idea of the Gaussian Monte-Carlo data
enhancement is to produce the Monte Carlo (MC) mass data for every hadron based on
the Gaussian distribution with the standard deviationσdefined by the experimental error
∆m.
     The experimental measurement of a hadron mass in PDG is usually denoted asm=
(M c+∆m       +−∆m     −) withM  c representing the central value while ∆m ± denote the asymmetry errors.
The concrete procedures are as follows.  First,  we naively average the asymmetry errors
∆m    + and ∆m − to obtain the standard deviationσ=                       12(∆m      + + ∆m −).  Then we assume
the  mass  data  follow  the  Gaussian  distributionN(M             c,σ2).   Finally,  for  each  meson,  we
implement the MC sampling to obtainN             aug mass data within the range ofM  c±kσ, where
kis the sampling constant used to control the distribution range of meson mass, andk= 1
andN       aug = 500 are set in the current research.














Fig. 1:The mass distribution ofπ(1300) andψ(4040) after the Gaussian enhancement.

     All  data  points  produced  by  MC  sampling  from  an  original  meson  share  the  same
quantum numbers, with only the mass feature being varied.  After this data enhancement,
each  meson  state  is  effectively  expanded,  and  the  total  data  sample  is  increased  from
∼400 to∼200000.  This process simulates the statistical nature of experimental detections
and efficiently enhances the robustness of the neural network model.  InFig. 1we show
the  resulting  mass  distributions  forπ(1300)  andψ(4040).   While  the  augmented  mass
values introduce a necessary variance, this can also obscure the precise hierarchy between
different meson states.  The auxiliary featureNis therefore particularly important in this




                                                       – 8 –
context,  as  it  provides  a  stable,  normalized  index  of  each  meson’s  position  in  the  mass
spectrum,  complementing  the  fluctuating  mass  value.   During  the  inference  stage,  the
model  utilizes  the  standard  experimental  central  values (as  listed  in  the  PDG)  as  input
without augmentation to produce deterministic width predictions.

3    Deep neural network model

After finishing the feature construction and data enhancement, we now choose a suitable
neural network architecture and build the deep learning model to deal with the task for
meson width predictions.  We will introduce the model architecture, the loss function, and
the training and testing strategy.

3.1    Backbone of the model
Among all these deep neural network architectures,  the Transformer [21] model has out-
standing performance in many aspects for its self-attention mechanism.  Compared with
the  traditional  fully  connected  network  or  the  convolutional  neural  network,  the  Trans-
former model is able to process the input data in parallel and can also capture the long
distance dependencies of data.  Though designed for the natural language processing, its
core idea has also been successfully applied to many science fields to deal with the deeply
complicated inner mapping and dynamics.  Considering the fact that we are dealing with
the  tabular  data  with  complicated  heterogeneous  features,  we  choose  the  Feature  Tok-
enizer Transformer (FT-Transformer) as the backbone of the model.  The FT-Transformer
is designed specifically for tabular data and can effectively capture complex nonlinear de-
pendence between different features by the self-attention mechanism.  The main parts of
the FT-Transformer are shown inFig. 2.















Fig.  2:The  main  parts  of  the  FT-Transformer  architecture.   Both  the  numerical  and
categorical features are first embedded tod-dimensional vectors, which are then together
with the [CLS] token fed into the typical Transformer encoder layer.

     The FT-Transformer first makes feature tokenization to map the heterogeneous raw
input features (both the categorical and continuous features) to a unified high-dimensional
vector space.  For each categorical feature (such as particle quantum numbersP,C, and




                                                     – 9 –
G),  the  model  converts  the  discrete  integer  index  into  a  dense  feature  vectore              cat∈R   d
through an embedding layer withdrepresenting the embedding dimension.  The embedding
is implemented by a lookup table for the categorical features.
     For each continuous feature (such as meson mass), the model employs an augmented
embedding  module  detailed  in  Sec.   2.1  and  illustrated  inFig.  3(a),  which  performs  a
linear  transformation  on  each  continuous  feature  value  and  then  maps  it  into  the  same
d-dimensional space, namely,

                                              enum =x    numw+b,                                               (3.1)

wherew,b∈R           d denote the weight and bias vectors exclusive to the corresponding feature
xnum.  In addition,  in order to enable the model to effectively utilize all the information
of the raw data, we designed a mask value for each numerical feature to indicate whether
this value is determined.  Then we concatenate the embedding vectors of each feature-mask
pair, and then fuse them through a linear layer to generate a single vector, namely,

                                       efused = Linear[(e                raw;e mask)],                                       (3.2)

where  the  symbol  ‘;’  in  above  bracket  denotes  the  concatenation  operation.   The  above
process ensures that the model can deal with a feature with determined or undetermined
value.
     All tokenized feature vectors will be concatenated with a special classification token
[CLS] in the sequence dimension to form the final input sequence.  The sequence is then
fed  into  a  Transformer  encoder  consisting  ofLidentical  layers  stacked  together.   Each
layer of the encoder consists of two core submodules:  a Multi-Head Self-Attention module
and a feedforward network, which is graphically shown inFig. 3(b).  Residual connection


















Fig. 3:(a) The Augmented Embedding module to deal with the numerical features; (b)
one Transformer layer.

and layer normalization are also applied after each submodule to ensure training stability.
The  multi-head  self-attention  mechanism  is  the  core  of  the  model,  which  evaluates  the




                                                      – 10 –
mutual importance between all tokens in the sequence by calculating the scaled dot product
between the query (Q), key (K), and value,(V), namely,
                                                                        QKT
                               Attention(Q,K,V) = Softmax                 √dK      V,                             (3.3)

whered     K  is the dimension ofKvector.  This allows every feature token to interact with
and incorporate context from all other features in the feature vector.
     After being processed by theLlayer encoders, the final output vector corresponding
to the [CLS] token is considered as a highly aggregated representation of the entire input
feature sequence.  Specifically, in our finalized configuration, the model processes an input
sequence of 19 tokens (comprising 1 [CLS] token and 18 feature tokens) with an embedding
dimension ofd= 512.  The encoder stack comprisesL= 6 identical Transformer layers.
Within each layer, the data flow preserves the tensor shape ofB×19×512.  The Multi-Head
Attention module utilizesh= 16 heads, each with a dimension ofd                     head = 32 (satisfying the
projection 16×32 = 512).  The subsequent Feed-Forward Network employs the GEGLU
activation function with an expansion factor of 4, expanding the hidden dimension to 2048
(4×512) before projecting back to 512.  Finally, the 512-dimensional vector corresponding
to the [CLS] token is extracted and passed through the output head.  This head explicitly
consists of a Layer Normalization step followed directly by a single Linear layer (5127→1),
which maps the latent representation to the meson width.

3.2    Loss function to describe the meson widths
The loss function serves as the ultimate principle for the neural network model.  The core
task of the neural network designed before is to precisely predict the total widths of mesons
based on the input quantum numbers.  The prediction precision for theith particle can be
represented by the relative errorϵ    i as

                                                 ϵi =|ˆy  i−y  i|yi  ,                                                    (3.4)

where ˆy i andy   i denote the predicted value and true value for theith sample, respectively.
To  obtain  the  globally  optimal  description,  we  use  the  following  mean  square  relative
error (MSRE), namely,

                                                    nX            nX   ˆy i−y  i 2
                               Loss =ϵ    2 =  1n      ϵ2i  =  1n          yi        ,                              (3.5)
                                                   i=1           i=1

where the summation is over all the training data samples;  also we defineϵto represent
the overall relative error.  The loss function ensures that each particle has the same weight
in the training.

3.3    Training and validation
The division of the dataset into a training and a test set was a physically-motivated com-
promise choice since only∼400 real mesons can be used to conduct the deep neural network




                                                      – 11 –
experiment.  The training set is composed of the vast majority of conventionalq¯qmesons
and a subset of relatively well-established exotic candidates.  The test set comprises the re-
maining particles, resulting in an approximate 90%:10% ratio.  The training set is used for
updating model parameters, while the test set remains completely independent throughout
training and is used only for final performance evaluation.
     Due to the significant range of meson widths (10−14 ∼625 MeV), direct minimization
of the loss function from random initialization leads to numerical instabilities.  We therefore
employ a two-phase progressive training strategy.  In the first∼100 epochs the LogCosh loss
function is used for stable initialization. Then we turn to the usual MSRE for the remaining
epochs.  Early stopping and learning rate scheduling are based on the convergence behavior
of the loss function.
     In the training implementation, we use the AdamW optimizer [52] to update model pa-
rameters with an initial learning rateη= 10   −4    and weight decay 10−4  .  To achieve stable
learning rate adjustments, we employ a hybrid strategy of linear warm-up and ReduceL-
ROnPlateau [53]: in the first 10 epochs,ηsmoothly increases from 10    −5   to the initial value;
subsequently, the learning rate decays by a factor of 0.75 when training loss plateaus.  The
entire training process is conducted with a batch size of 64 for a maximum of∼500 epochs,
with loss values continuously monitored.

4    Numerical results of the meson width predictions

4.1    Overall performance of the model
The research focuses on the task of describing and predicting the meson widths ranging
from 10−14   MeV to 625 MeV, which poses a serious challenge to any predictive model.  In
order to systematically evaluate the performance of the model on meson width predictions,
we investigate the prediction accuracy from both macro and micro perspectives.
     InFig. 4we show the overall performance of the meson width predictions for all the data
including both the training and the test data.  To present the results more clearly across
multiple orders of magnitude, we have taken the natural logarithm of the meson widths in
units of MeV. Thex-axis represents the experimental widths reported by PDG [11], while
the verticaly-axis represents the predicted values.  The blue dots denote the results of the
training data while the orange ones denote that of the test sample.  It can be seen that the
model’s predicted values are all closely distributed around the ideal liney=x, indicating
that the model has successfully captured the overall trend and correlation.  To quantita-
tively evaluate the linear correlation, we calculated the coefficient of determination for the
log-transformed values, which isR   2 = 0.9987.  This macroscopic performance validates the
effectiveness of the data processing scheme and the model architecture.
     To investigate the prediction accuracy at the original physical scale, we also plot the
distribution of the relative errorϵ    i (defined inEq. 3.4) versus the log width in units of MeV
inFig. 5.  The distribution for the training data (blue) is almost clustered around the zero
error line.  After excluding several states withϵ    i >48%, the obtained relative errors are
ϵ= 0.12%,2.0%,and 0.54% for the training set, the test set, and all the data, respectively.
More specifically, among the 370 training mesons, 99% of the samples had a relative error




                                                     – 12 –
Fig. 4:The predicted meson widths versus the experimental values in units of MeV under
the  natural  logarithm.   The  horizontal  axis  represents  the  experimental  widths  reported
by PDG, while the vertical axis represents the predicted values.  The blue dots denote the
results of the training data, while the orange ones denote results of the test sample.


<1%, while 80% of the samples even had a relative error of less than 0.1%, which indicates
that the model can describe the training data well.
     The generalization ability of the model is more reflected by the prediction performance
for the test data.  As shown inFig. 5, the error distribution of the test set (orange) exhibits
high  differentiation.   On  the  one  hand,  most  mesons  in  the  test  set  still  show  quite  low
relative errors.  After excluding a few outliers with significant errors (>48%),  the mean
relative  error  of  the  remaining  27  mesons  in  the  test  data  is  about  2%.   If  we  further
exclude thefandηfamilies , whose flavor-mixed states require an approximation in the
quark content encoding, the remaining 22 traditional mesons have the mean relative errors
of about 0.4%, which achieves the high-precision level comparable to the training set.  The
above results clearly reveal that the model has good generalization ability in predicting the
widths of the traditional mesons.
     Notice that there exist significant deviations in the prediction results for those exotic
candidates and mixed states,  which highlights both the boundary and the utility of our
data-driven  approach.   The  prediction  deviations  are  mostly  caused  by  the  limited  data




                                                      – 13 –
Fig.  5:The  relative  errorϵ      i  versus  the  log  widths  in  units  of  MeV.  The  blue (orange)
denotes the results of the training (test) data.


samples.   Statistical  analysis  reveals  that  only  21  exotic  candidates  are  included  in  the
training set, which only constitute∼5% of the total samples.  Furthermore, a significant
portion (10/21) of those states have missing quantum numbers.
     As is well known, the performance of the neural network model is basically determined
by the volume, distribution and diversity of the data samples.  The lack of exotic samples
has largely constrained the model’s prediction accuracy and generalization ability to the
exotic states.  As more exotic states are discovered in experiments, we will also incorporate
these new particles into the subsequent model updates to improve the performance and
generalization.
     On the other hand, the large prediction errors for those states, in turn, may indicate
their distinct internal structures from traditional mesons.  The latest PDG reviews [54,55]
explicitly discuss that the more favored interpretation for theχ   c1 (3872) is aD   ¯D∗ hadronic
molecule,  while  bothD  ∗s0 (2317)  andD   s1 (2460)  are  widely  considered  asDKandDK    ∗
molecular  states,  respectively.   In  this  context,  the  deep  neural  network  can  serve  as  a
data-driven probe to explore the meson inner structure.  A large prediction error may also
hint at the particle’s inner structure or dynamics deviates from the traditional assumption.




                                                      – 14 –
                          Tab. Ishows a comparison of the model’s predictions with theoretical calculations for
                     those test sample mesons. The comparison reveals that the relative errors are around∼1%,
                     while theoretical approaches show errors ranging from∼8% to several hundred percent.
                     Different  theoretical  methods  can  yield  substantially  different  predictions  for  the  same
                     state.  For instance, the calculated width forB  ∗s2 (5840) ranges from 1.0 MeV to 10.3 MeV,
                     corresponding to relative errors of 0.3% and 560%, respectively.

                     Tab.  I:Comparison  of  meson  widths (in  units  of  MeV)  with  theoretical  predictions  for
                     test sample mesons.  ΓExp denotes experimental width from the PDG [11]; Γ      Th.1(2) denotes
                     theoretical predictions from various approaches; ΓThis denotes the predictions of this work.
                     Here the relative errors are calculated by Error=|Γ                pred−Γ    Exp|/Γ    Exp×100%.















                          In summary, the analysis in this subsection indicates that the model show high accuracy
                     in predicting the widths of the traditional mesons and good generalization performance.
                     At the same time, it shows systematically significant errors in dealing with the potential
                     exotic states.  However,  this result in turn provides us a tentative probe to identify and
                     reexamine the potential exotic states from their total widths.

                     4.2    Meson width predictions and quantum numbers identification

                     We list the meson width spectra obtained by the deep neural network in the appendix of
                     Supplementary Materials.  InFig. 6, we provide quantitative width predictions for 15 un-
                     measured mesons (green) in PDG, as well as 32 new mesons (orange) that were theoretically
                     predicted by the GI model [3] but not yet experimentally discovered.  These results provide
                     helpful references and tests for future experimental searches and theoretical studies.
                          InTab. IIwe compare the predictions for the unmeasured bottomonium mesons with
                     the theoretical results from Godfrey-Moats (GM) in ref. [63].  Forχ    b1 (nP) andh      b(nP), both
                     approaches predict an increasing trend with radial quantum numbern, Γ(1P)<Γ(2P). For
                     χb0 (nP), our predictions decrease slightly withnwhile GM values remain approximately
                     constant.   Forχ  b2 (nP),  the  trends  are  opposite,  our  predictions  decrease  withnwhile
                     GM predictions increase.  Regarding relative magnitudes across differentJ PC  states, both
                     approaches predictχ      b0 (nP) to be broader thanχ       b1 (nP) andh      b(nP) states at the same
                     radial excitation level.  The obtained predictions can be tested in the future experiments,
                     which can also serve as a reference for potential experimental explorations.




Particle       ΓPDG       ΓTh.1    Ref.    Error (%)        ΓTh.2    Ref.    Error (%)– 15 –  ΓThis    Error (%)

B∗s2 (5840)     1.49       1.0      [56]        32.9         10.3     [57]         560         1.49          0.2

K∗2(1430)       100.0      80.1     [58]        20.0           -         -             -       99.8          0.2

K∗(1410)        231.8      214     [58]         7.7            -         -             -      231.3         0.2

D1(2420)        31.3        25      [59]        20.1           -         -             -       31.1          0.7

D2(2740)        88.5       56.3     [60]        36.3        111.6    [61]        26.1          88.1          0.4

ψ(4360)         118.4      37.5     [62]         216         38.6     [62]         207        110.6         6.6
                          Notice that the performance in bottomonium systems is more affected by the limited
                    training data.  Bottomonium comprises∼2.5% of our training set, with excitedP-wave and
                    D-wave states almost entirely absent.  The model transfers knowledge from light-quark and
                    charm sectors where training data are more abundant.  The results also illustrate that the
                    performance of data-driven approaches is more reliable within the training distribution.

                    Tab. II:Comparison of predicted widths (MeV) for several unmeasured (b    ¯b) states with
                    theoretical estimates from Godfrey-Moats (GM) in ref. [63].








                          Besides predicting the unknown meson widths, the model also provides us a tentative
                    probe  to  explore  the  possible  quantum  numbers  for  undetermined  mesons  based  on  the
                    comparison between the experimental width and the predicted one.  We conducted a series
                    of hypothesis tests on various particles with unknown quantum numbers using the trained
                    model.  Namely, the possible quantum numbers are fed into the model to predict the corre-
                    sponding widths which are then compared with the experimental values.  The comparison
                    results provide the model’s suggested quantum numbers for those states, which are listed
                    inTab. III.
                          For theX(4160) state, the PDG favors theJ       PC = 2−+   assignment with a significance
                    of over 4σ.  Under the assumption of a 2 −+    [c¯cu¯u] tetraquark state, the predicted width
                    138.5 MeV is well consistent with the experimental value 136 MeV. ForX(4630), the PDG
                    favors the 1−  assignment over the 2−; the model shows that under the [c¯cs¯s] hypothesis,
                    both  the  1−+    and  2−+    yield  predictions  consistent  with  the  experimental  width.   For
                    Tc¯c   (4100), the PDG suggests the assignment 0+ or 1−.  The model’s prediction 164.3 MeV
                    under the 1−+    hypothesis is quite close to the experimental value 150+80−70   MeV and then
                    favors the latter assignment.  The model shows good consistency between its predictions
                    and the preliminary conclusions drawn from experimental analyses by the PDG, which in
                    turn provides independent, data-driven support for these findings.
                          For  particles  where  the  PDG  has  not  provided  a  clear  preference,  the  model  offers
                    independent assignments for their quantum numbers. For example, theJ   P  = 0+ hypothesis
                    forD(3000) yields the predicted width with about a 2% relative error from the experimental
                    value.  For the tetraquarkT         c¯c   (4050), under the 3−+   assignment the model gives a predicted
                    width that is quite close to the experimental value.  Plausible quantum number assignments
                    were also identified for several other particles, such asX(1750) andB    ∗sJ(5850).
                          For theK,DandBstates, if only the parityPis specified, the predictions show good
                    consistency with the experimental data,  which is a manifestation of the strategy for the
                    missing  features.   In  these  cases,  our  analysis  provides  support  for  the  particles  to  have
                    specificPvalues, while the determination of their precise spinJvalues is beyond the scope
                    of the current predictive model.




                                                                           – 16 –


State    χb0 (1P) χ   b0 (2P)    χb1 (1P) χ   b1 (2P)     hb(1P) h   b(2P)      χb2 (1P) χ   b2 (2P) χ   b2 (3P)
JPC        0++         0++          1++         1++         1+−          1+−      2++         2++         2++

This       73.3         59.4        0.16         0.93       0.35        1.23      19.2         17.3         14.6
GM          2.6           2.6      0.096       0.117       0.073      0.084       0.18         0.23         0.25
Fig.  6:The  predicted  widths  for  47  meson  states,  where  the  green  labels  denote  the
states observed in experiments and the orange ones denote the states predicted by the GI
model [3].


4.3    Analysis of quark content encoding

To evaluate the influence of encoding approximations and explore the internal structures
of mixed states, we performed a sensitivity analysis on seven representative mesons.  We
tested the model’s response to four physical hypotheses:    1√2(u¯u+d           ¯d), (s¯s),              1√6(u¯u+d           ¯d−
2s¯s),  and             1√3(u¯u+d           ¯d+s¯s).   The  results  are  summarized  inFig.  7.   A  general  pattern
emerges  from  this  analysis:   the  predictions  tend  to  cluster  according  to  the  dominant
quark flavor.  Specifically, the results for thes¯sand octet-mixing scenarios (both strange-
rich) are numerically close.  This suggests that the model is sensitive to the relative weight
of strangeness in the input.
     We first examined this sensitivity using well-established states.  According to the PDG
review [65], theϕ(1020) is characterized as a nearly pures¯sstate.  Similarly, forf          ′2(1525),
the review cites a mixing angle ofα  T ≈81 ◦, which is proximal to the ideal mixing limit
of 90◦ (corresponding to a pures¯sconfiguration).  This indicates that thef     ′2(1525) is pre-
dominantly composed of strange quarks.  The model’s predictions indicate that for both




                                                        – 17 –
                          Tab. III:The model’s predicted widths and favored quantum numbers for the undeter-
                          mined mesons.













































                          ϕ(1020) andf  ′2(1525), the relative errors are minimal (<1%) only under the strange-rich
States             I(G)   (J P(C)     )       ΓExpencoding (s¯sor octet), whereas the light-quark hypotheses lead to significant deviations.I(G)   (J P(C)     )  Quark  ΓPre1I(G)   (J P(C)     )  Quark  ΓPre2
X(1750)              ?−(1−−)      120±10Conversely,  for theω(782),  the pure light             10−(1−−)   s¯s   149.1√2(u¯u+d           ¯d) encoding yields the optimal pre-0−(1−−)  u¯us¯s 149.1

                        1diction,  suggesting that the model correctly captures the correspondence between flavor1
K(1630)                 2(??)           16+19−16dynamics and total width.2(?−)   d¯s     16.4                 -              -          -
K(3100)                ??(??)         42±16                     1                                         3
                                 Regarding theη(1405), predictions based on the light-quark structure show a significant2(?+)   u¯s     41.52(2+)   sd¯u¯u  38.5
D∗(2640)                1deviation from the experimental width.  In contrast, the strange-rich scenarios align much1-              -          -
                        2(??)    <15                            2(?−)   c  ¯d     16.9
D(3000)                 1better with the data, with the pures¯shypothesis yielding a relative error of∼2%.  This1-              -          -
                        2(??)         190±80                    2(0+)   c¯u   186.1
DsJ(3040)               0(??)         240±60                    0(?−)    c¯s    177.3                         -              -          -

X(3940)                ??(???)          43+28−18             0−(3+−  )   c¯c     36.1                   0+(2++)   c¯c     35.4
X(4160)                ??(???)         136+60−35             0+(2−+  )  u¯uc¯c  138.5         – 18 –0+(2−+  )  d  ¯dc¯c  160.9
X(4630)               0+(??+)        170+140−80              0+(2−+  )  s¯sc¯c  167.3                   0+(1−+  )  s¯sc¯c  152.9
B∗J(5732)               ?(??)         128±18                    1                                             -              -          -
                                                                2(?−)   d ¯b    126.5
BJ(5840)+               1                                       1                                             -              -          -
                        2(??)         220±80                    2(?−)   u ¯b   190.7
BJ(5840)0               1                                       1                                             -              -          -
                        2(??)         130±40                    2(?−)   d ¯b    123.9
BJ(5970)+               1                                       1                                             -              -          -
                        2(??)          62±20                    2(?−)   u ¯b     74.5
BJ(5970)0               1                                       1                                             -              -          -
                        2(??)          81±12                    2(?−)   d ¯b     90.5
B∗sJ(5850)              ?(??)          47±22                    0(1−)    s ¯b     36.9                        -              -          -
BsJ(6063)               0(??)           26±6                    0(2−)    s ¯b     22.9                        -              -          -
BsJ(6114)               0(??)          66±28                    0(4−)    s ¯b     82.7                        -              -          -

Tc¯c   (4050)         1−(??+)         82+50−28               1−(3−+  )  u  ¯dc¯c    82.8                1−(2−+  )  u  ¯dc¯c  105.0
Tc¯c   (4055)         1+(??− )        45±13                  1+(3+−  )  u  ¯dc¯c    49.1                1+(2+−  )  u  ¯dc¯c   35.9
Tc¯c   (4100)         1−(??+)        150+80−70               1−(1−+  )  u  ¯dc¯c  164.3                 1−(0++)  u  ¯dc¯c  230.4
Tc¯c   (4250)         1−(??+)        180+320−70              1−(1−+  )  u  ¯dc¯c  175.2                 1−(0−+  )  u  ¯dc¯c  172.0
Tcc¯c¯c      (6600)   0+(???)     440+230−200  [64]          0+(2++)  cc¯c¯c    96.2                    0+(1+−  )  cc¯c¯c  120.3
Tcc¯c¯c      (6900)   0+(???)       137±21                   0+(2++)  cc¯c¯c    99.3                    0+(1+−  )  cc¯c¯c  122.4
Tcc¯c¯c      (7100)   0+(???)       97+40−29  [64]           0+(2++)  cc¯c¯c  100.6                     0+(0++)  cc¯c¯c   80.4
Tbs(5568)               1(??)            19+9−7                 1(3+)   u  ¯ds¯b   23.2                1(1+/2  +)  u  ¯ds¯b   25.7
Fig. 7:Analysis of the predicted widths for representative mesons under different quark
content  hypotheses.   The  black  horizontal  lines  indicate  the  experimental  central  values
taken  from  the  PDG [11].   The  colored  markers  represent  the  model  predictions  corre-
sponding to four specific encoding assumptions:  pure light quarks [  1√2(u¯u+d           ¯d),▷], pure
strange  quarks  [s¯s,△],  singlet-like  mixing  [               1√3(u¯u+d           ¯d+s¯s),◁],  and  octet-like  mixing
[  1√6(u¯u+d           ¯d−2s¯s),▽].   The  doubleY-axis  is  used  to  accommodate  the  large  range  of
widths, with the right axis specifically for the narrow statesω(782) andϕ(1020).


numerical preference for strangeness is interesting in light of the discussion in the PDG
review on theη(1405/1475) region [66].  While the review suggests that the nearbyη(1475)
is the likelys¯smember of the nonet due to itsK    ∗ ¯Kdecay, it also explicitly indicates that
the data are not sufficient to exclude a sizeables¯sadmixture in theη(1405) as well.  The
model’s output is consistent with the presence of such a strange quark component.
     For the scalarf            0(980), we observe that all testedq¯qencoding hypotheses yield relative
errors  exceeding  400%.   These  large  deviations  indicate  that  the  current  feature  repre-
sentation, based on standard quark-antiquark assignments, is insufficient to describe this
state.  This observation aligns with the view summarized in the PDG review, which notes
a consensus towards a predominantly four-quark nature for thef       0(980) [67].
     Lastly, for thef      0(1770), the model’s response is less discriminatory compared to other
states,  with  relative  errors  remaining  below  7%  across  all  four  hypotheses.   The  flavor-




                                                          – 19 –
singlet encoding yields the lowest error∼1.4%. This state may have a more complex nature
as documented in the PDG review, where its interpretation involves varying mixtures of
q¯qand gluonic components [66].

4.4    Symmetries reproduced by the neural network

A  successful  model  should  not  only  have  high  accuracy  in  predicting  numerical  values,
but it should also comply with fundamental physical principles and symmetries.  In this
subsection  we  aim  to  verify  whether  the  deep  neural  network  model  can  autonomously
understand and reproduce the fundamental symmetries in particle physics,  for example,
the charge conjugation symmetry and the approximate isospin symmetry of meson widths.

4.4.1    Charge conjugation symmetry

TheCPTtheorem is one of the deepest results of quantum field theory, which states that
the combined operation of time reversal, charge conjugation, and parity in any order is an
exact symmetry of any interaction.  An important experimental implication of theCPT
theorem claims that every particle must have precisely the same mass and lifetime (width)
as its antiparticle, which has been tested by theK       0- ¯K0 mass difference fraction being less
than 6×10  −19   [11].  In the above research, the particle and antiparticle are trained by the
same neural network model and the only difference is the feature vector of the data set.
In meson feature vectorv, a particle and its antiparticle are directly different by a charge
conjugation transformation to the quark contents, for example,

                qB+c  = (0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,1)⇌(0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0) =q                                  B−c .           (4.1)

If  the  trained  model  can  also  predict  the  same  width  for  a  particle  and  its  antiparticle,
we can deduce that the neural network model is invariant under the charge conjugation
transformation.
     InFig. 8, we show the invariance of charge conjugation transformation clearly.  The
x-axis denotes the predicted log widths for particles,  while they-axis represents the log
widths for the corresponding antiparticles.  Then each point in this plot represents a two-
dimensional coordinate (ln ΓParticle,ln Γ Antiparticle) .  If the model was really invariant under
the  transformation  for  particle  and  antiparticle,  all  the  points  should  be  located  closely
along  the  liney=x.   FromFig.  8,  we  can  see  that  all  the  data  points,  regardless  of
their quark composition (color distinction) or role in the dataset (shape distinction), are
strictly  listed  along  they=xline.   We  also  calculate  the  determination  coefficient  to
beR  2 = 0.9999.  In order to reflect the degree of this symmetry violation for the neural
network model, we introduce the violation coefficient as

                                                 ACi = Γi−Γ   ¯iΓi + Γ¯i,                                                   (4.2)

where Γi and Γ¯i denote the widths of the particleiand its antiparticle, respectively.  Then
we can define the root mean square violation coefficientA C to denote the overall violation




                                                       – 20 –
Fig. 8:The predicted widths for particle-antiparticle pairs, plotted on a logarithmic scale.
The points in the test set are represented by pentagrams, while those in the training set
are represented by circles.  Key reference particles within the training set are highlighted
with  squares.   The  theoretically  predicted  (GI)  pairs  are  marked  with  dashed  edges  to
demonstrate generalization to unseen states.  Different colors are used to denote mesons
with different quark contents.



of charge conjugation symmetry of the model for all mesons,
                                         q             r   1 XA2Ci = 0.06%.                                (4.3)
                                 AC =       ⟨A  2Ci⟩=      n

The  obtained  result  indicates  that  the  model  makes  almost  identical  width  predictions
for particles and their antiparticles.  To further validate the charge conjugation symmetry
on  the  unseen  data,  we  also  presented  the  behaviors  for  charge  conjugation  symmetry
on  undiscovered  particles  inFig.  8,  where  the  undiscovered  particles  are  indicated  by
the  dashed  markers  and  the  meson  masses  are  based  on  the  theoretical  predictions  of




                                                      – 21 –
the famous GI model [3].  The model still maintains a strong symmetry with a violation
coefficient ofA  C  = 0.9% and a determination coefficient ofR       2  = 0.9997,  demonstrating
robust  generalization  beyond  the  training  distribution.   From  above  analysis,  it  can  be
deduced that the trained neural network model is invariant under the charge conjugation
transformation.

4.4.2    Isospin symmetry
Within the dynamics of the Standard Model, the strong interaction behaves much larger
than  the  electromagnetic  interaction  and  the  weak  interaction.   Meson  widths  are  then
usually  determined  by  the  corresponding  strong  decay  behaviors  except  for  those  that
can only electroweakly decay.  On the other hand, the strong interaction is approximately
invariant under the isospin transformation, and then the widths of mesons that can undergo
strong decay also exhibit approximate isospin symmetry.  In this subsection we investigate
whether the deep neural network model can capture this deep abstract symmetry.
     In order to check this point, we plot the predicted widths versus the averaged widths
for those isospin multiplets inFig. 9.  The results show the approximate isospin symmetry
of the model by comparing the predicted meson width (y-axis) with the average one of its
isospin  multiplets (x-axis).   As  shown  inFig.  9,  the  data  points  predicted  by  the  model
are also clustered along they=xline which stands for the perfect isospin symmetry of
meson widths.  The corresponding determination coefficient of this isospin symmetry are
determined to beR  2I = 0.9950.  One can see that the model correctly identifies the isospin
multiplets and maintain good consistence within their internal members.  The behaviors
of the test samples marked with black boxes in the figure validate the good generalization
performance of the model.
     The violation coefficientA Ii for isospin symmetry can be introduced similarly as

                                              AIi = Γi−⟨Γ i⟩IΓi +⟨Γ  i⟩I,                                                 (4.4)

where Γi denotes the width for mesoni, and⟨Γ          i⟩I  denotes the average one of the isospin
multiplets.  After calculating the root mean square forA  Ii, we obtain the violation coeffi-
cient of isospin symmetry for the model as
                                         q            r   1 XA2Ii = 14.0%,                                 (4.5)
                                 AI =       ⟨A  2Ii⟩=    n

where the summation is over all the mesons of isospinI >0.  This value reveals that the
isospin symmetry is significantly violated.  A closer inspection reveals that the deviation
is not uniformly distributed across all multiplets.  The pion multiplet (π ±,π0) is the pre-
dominant source of this large value.  If excluding the pions, the violation coefficient for the
remaining multiplets drops to 5.0%.  A less pronounced effect is observed for theDme-
son doublets (D ±,D0/ ¯D0); removing them as well reduces the coefficient to a remarkable
3.0%.  This final value is mainly a reflection of the more subtle deviations within theB
mesons sector.  Notice the isoscalar mesons are not included in theA   I calculation.  It can be




                                                     – 22 –
Fig. 9:The predicted width versus the averaged width of the isospin multiplets for mesons
with isospinI >0.  Thex-axis denotes the log average widths of the isospin multiplets,
whiley-axis  denotes  the  predicted  width  of  a  single  state.   The  dots  represent  results
for the isospin tripletsI= 1, while the triangles represent those for the isospin doublets
I= 1/2.The predictions for the unseen GI multiplets are indicated by markers with dashed
edges.


seen clearly from above results that the model still shows reasonable isospin symmetry but
this symmetry is obviously and much more violated compared with the charge conjugation
symmetry.
     We also verified the isospin symmetry behaviors on the unseen data of the GI predic-
tions, which are indicated by the dashed markers inFig. 9.  These theoretical states exhibit
a consistent pattern with a violation coefficient ofA  I  = 1.4% (R     2 = 0.9979), confirming
that the model’s approximate isospin symmetry generalizes well to the unobserved meson
spectrum.  These results show that the data-driven symmetries have emerged in the neural
network and generalized to the unknown region.
     In fact, the model has also captured the violation effects for different symmetries during




                                                      – 23 –
the training process,  and hence reproduced the effects in the inference process.  For the
mesons  in  the  training  set,  the  outputs  of  the  model  reflect  the  patterns  it  has  learned
from the input data.  For example, the model provides almost the same widths forπ      + and
π−  but quite different width values forπ      0  andπ        +;  forK,D, andBfamily mesons, the
predicted widths behave slightly different within the isospin multiplets but behave quite
close for the particles and their corresponding antiparticles.
     The difference in the determination coefficientsR    2 (0.9999 vs. 0.9950) can be taken as a
measure of the strictness of model symmetries.  The result is consistent with physical reality
since the charge conjugation symmetry is much more precise than the isospin symmetry.
Combining the results inFig. 8andFig. 9, we can conclude that the output of the model
not only qualitatively follows the physical symmetry, but also quite precisely reflects the
accuracy of different symmetries at a quantitative level.  The results above indicate that the
constructed feature system and neural network have good learning and inference abilities to
distinguish the detailed physics determined by different interactions or input parameters.
     The results above indicate that the constructed neural network has good learning and
inference abilities to distinguish the complicated physics determined by different interac-
tions and input parameters.  It is worth noting that the landscape of machine learning in
QCD is quite diverse.  The symbolic regression has been demonstrated demonstrate effec-
tive in discovering analytical expressions for fundamental parameters [38],  while physics-
informed networks are powerful in solving governing equations for dynamical systems such
as  flux  tubes [39].   In  parallel,  our  work  explores  the  ability  of  deep  neural  networks  in
predicting hadron widths where explicit analytical formulations remain challenging.  Col-
lectively, these distinct data-driven approaches contribute to a neural-network-based un-
derstanding of the strong interaction physics.

5    Summary and outlook

In this work, we build a deep neural network model to predict the total widths of mesons
based on the Transformer architecture, which can also be used as a tentative probe to deter-
mine the meson quantum numbers.  The input feature vector is constructed from the meson
quantum numbers and mass.  To overcome the lack of data samples for training the deep
learning model, we adopt the Gaussian Monte-Carlo data enhancement method to enhance
the meson data by considering the experimental errors, which also significantly improves
the robustness and generalization performance of the model.  Within the width range from
∼10 −14    to∼625 MeV, the relative errors of the model’s predictions areϵ= 0.12%, 2.0%,
and 0.54% in the training set, the test set, and all the meson data, respectively.  We present
width predictions for currently discovered mesons and some theoretical predicted ones.  The
obtained width spectra can provide useful references to both the experimental and theo-
retical research and can also be tested by the future experiments.  Its predictive deviations
further serve as a valuable probe to study the quantum numbers and inner structures for
some undetermined mesons.
     Furthermore, the obtained model exhibits well-defined charge conjugation symmetry
and the approximate isospin symmetry consistent with real physical phenomena.  Namely,




                                                     – 24 –
the pure data-driven model can spontaneously reproduce symmetries in the real physical
world.   The  results  indicate  that  the  deep  neural  network  can  serve  as  an  independent
supplementary research paradigm to describe and explore the hadron structures and the
complicated interactions in particle physics besides traditional experimental measurements,
theoretical calculations, and lattice simulations.
     Based on the current study and above discussions, we can see that there exist several
potential optimization directions for this data-driven neural network model.  First, a more
precise encoding scheme for the quark content would be important for the exotic states and
mesons with flavor mixing, such as theη,ϕ,ffamily, and the unnatural open flavor mesons.
For those states, the experimental good quantum numbers cannot uniquely determine the
mesons.   A  more  effective  training  method  can  be  explored  to  maximize  the  utilization
of existing experimental data.  Also, a more efficient encoding scheme can be explored to
decrease the number of parameters and to eliminate the possible encoding redundancy of
the current model.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFA1604803),
and  the  Natural  Science  Basic  Research  Program  of  Shaanxi (2025JC-YBMS-020).   It  is
also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant
Nos. 12047503, 12575097, 12005169, 12075301, and 11821505.


References

 [1]Han M Y and Nambu Y 1965Phys. Rev.139B1006
 [2]Fritzsch H, Gell-Mann M, and Leutwyler H 1973Phys. Lett. B47365
 [3]Godfrey S and Isgur N 1985Phys. Rev. D32189
 [4]Capstick S and Isgur N 1986Phys. Rev. D342809
 [5]Eichten E J and Quigg C 1994Phys. Rev. D495845
 [6]Klempt E and Zaitsev A 2007Phys. Rep.4541
 [7]Chen H X, Chen W, Liu X, Liu Y R, and Zhu S L 2017Rep. Prog. Phys.80076201
 [8]Olsen S L, Skwarnicki T, and Zieminska D 2018Rev. Mod. Phys.90015003
 [9]Guo F K, Hanhart C, Meißner U G, Wang Q, Zhao Q, and Zou B S 2018Rev. Mod. Phys.
     90015004
[10]Karliner M and Rosner J L 2018Phys. Rev. D97094006
[11]Navas Set al.(Particle Data Group) 2024Phys. Rev. D110030001
[12]Chen H X, Chen W, Liu X, Liu Y R, and Zhu S L 2023Rep. Prog. Phys.86026201
[13]LeCun Y, Bengio Y, and Hinton G 2015Nature521436
[14]Rumelhart D E, Hinton G E, and Williams R J 1986Nature323533
[15]Hopfield J J 1982Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.792554




                                                     – 25 –
[16]Elman J L 1990Cogn. Sci.14179
[17]Hochreiter S and Schmidhuber J 1997Neural Comput.91735
[18]Bengio Y, Ducharme R, Vincent P, and Jauvin C 2003J. Mach. Learn. Res.31137
[19]LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, and Haffner P 1998Proc. IEEE862278
[20]He K, Zhang X, Ren S, and Sun J 2016Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
     (CVPR)770
[21]Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez A N, Kaiser L, and
     Polosukhin I 2017Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.305998
[22]Krenn M, Pollice R, Guo S Y, Aldeghi M, Cervera-Lierta A, Friederich P, dos Passos Gomes
     G, H¨ase F, and Jinich Aet al.2022Nat. Rev. Phys.4761
[23]Radovic A, Williams M, Rousseau D, Kagan M, Bonacorsi D, Himmel A, Aurisano A, Terao
     K, and Wongjirad T 2018Nature56041
[24]Guest D, Cranmer K, and Whiteson D 2018Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.68161
[25]Carleo G, Cirac I, Cranmer K, Daudet L, Schuld M, Tishby N, Vogt-Maranto L, and
     Zdeborov´a L 2019Rev. Mod. Phys.91045002
[26]Zhou K, Wang L, Pang L G, and Shi S 2024Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys.135104084
[27]Ma Y G, Pang L G, Wang R, and Zhou K 2023Chin. Phys. Lett.40122101
[28]Ju Xet al.(Exa.TrkX Collaboration) 2020arXiv:2003.11603
[29]Lonnblad L, Peterson C, and Rognvaldsson T 1991Nucl. Phys. B349675
[30]Bols E, Kieseler J, Verzetti M, Stoye M, and Stakia A 2020JINST15P12012
[31]Komiske P T, Metodiev E M, and Thaler J 2019JHEP01121
[32]Roe B P, Yang H J, Zhu J, Liu Y, Stancu I, and McGregor G 2005Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A
     543577
[33]Baldi P, Cranmer K, Faucett T, Sadowski P, and Whiteson D 2016Eur. Phys. J. C76235
[34]Mumpower M R, Sprouse T M, Lovell A E, and Mohan A T 2022Phys. Rev. C106L021301
[35]He W, Li Q, Ma Y, Niu Z, Pei J, and Zhang Y 2023Sci. China Phys. Mech. Astron.66
     282001
[36]Zhang W, Zhang Z, Hu J, Lu B, Pang J, and Wang Q 2025Chin. Phys. Lett.42070202
[37]Zhang Z, Ma R, Hu J, and Wang Q 2022Chin. Phys. Lett.39111201
[38]Wang X Y, Dong C, and Liu X 2024Chin. Phys. Lett.41031201
[39]Kou W, Lin X, Guo B, and Chen X 2025Phys. Rev. D112056027
[40]Malekhosseini M, Rostami S, Olamaei A R, Ostovar R, and Azizi K 2024Phys. Rev. D110
     054011
[41]Akan T 2024Phys. Scr.99125305
[42]Gorishniy Y V, Rubachev I, Khrulkov V, and Babenko A 2021Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
     Syst.3418932
[43]Hornik K, Stinchcombe M, and White H 1989Neural Netw.2359
[44]Cybenko G 1989Math. Control Signals Syst.2303




                                                       – 26 –
[45]Lu Z, Pu H, Wang F, Hu Z, and Wang L 2017Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.306231
[46]Malekhosseini M, Rostami S, Olamaei A R, and Azizi K 2025Nucl. Phys. B1018116977
[47]Aad Get al.(ATLAS Collaboration) 2024Eur. Phys. J. C841309
[48]Aaij Ret al.(LHCb Collaboration) 2013Phys. Lett. B726151
[49]Fujimoto Y, Fukushima K, and Murase K 2021JHEP03273
[50]Abbott B Pet al.(LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) 2016Phys. Rev.
      Lett.116061102
[51]Aad Get al.(ATLAS Collaboration) 2023Phys. Lett. B843137745
[52]Loshchilov I and Hutter F 2019Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR 2019)
[53]Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, and Hinton G 2012Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.251106
[54]Gutsche T, Hanhart C, and Mitchell R E 2024 in Navas Set al.(Particle Data Group)Phys.
      Rev. D110030001
[55]Hern´andez-Rey J J, Louren¸co C, Mitchell R E, Navas S, and Patrignani C 2024 in Navas Set
      al.(Particle Data Group)Phys. Rev. D110030001
[56]Ferretti J and Santopinto E 2018Phys. Rev. D97114020
[57]Gupta P and Upadhyay A 2019Phys. Rev. D99094043
[58]Pang C Q, Wang J Z, Liu X, and Matsuki T 2017Eur. Phys. J. C77861
[59]Godfrey S 2005Phys. Rev. D72054029
[60]Wang Z G 2013Phys. Rev. D88114003
[61]Yu G L, Wang Z G, Li Z Y, and Ma G Q 2015Chin. Phys. C39063101
[62]Man Z L, Shu C R, Liu Y R, and Chen H 2024Eur. Phys. J. C84810
[63]Godfrey S and Moats K 2015Phys. Rev. D92054034
[64]Hayrapetyan Aet al.(CMS Collaboration) 2024Phys. Rev. Lett.132111901
[65]Amsler C, Crede V, and DeGrand T 2024 in Navas Set al.(Particle Data Group)Phys. Rev.
      D110030001
[66]Amsler C, Giovannella A, Masoni A, and Venanzoni G 2024 in Navas Set al.(Particle Data
      Group)Phys. Rev. D110030001
[67]Gutsche T, Hanhart C, Mitchell R E, and Spanier S 2024 in Navas Set al.(Particle Data
      Group)Phys. Rev. D110030001


A    Spectra of the predicted meson widths

We  list  the  spectra  of  the  predicted  meson  widths  inFig.  10∼Fig.  16.  Fig.  10shows
the predicted widths for the isovector mesons with quark contents [u  ¯d,p1/2(u¯u−d                ¯d),d¯u];
Fig. 11,  the strange mesons (u¯s,d¯s);Fig. 12,  the isoscalar mesons,  (u¯u,d¯u,s¯s);Fig. 13,
the charmonia mesons (c¯c);Fig. 14, the charmed mesons (c              ¯d,c¯u,c¯s);Fig. 15, the bottomed
mesons (b¯u,b     ¯d,b¯s,b¯c); and finally,Fig. 16, the Υ family (b              ¯b).






                                                          – 27 –
Fig. 10:The predicted log widths for mesons with quark contents [u       ¯d,p1/2(u¯u−d                ¯d),d¯u].
They-axis denotes the log widths ln Γ with Γ in units of MeV.


























Fig. 11:The predicted log widths for strange mesons (u¯s,d¯s).  The legend is as forFig. 10.






                                                               – 28 –
Fig. 12:The predicted log widths for isoscalar mesons (u¯u,d           ¯d,s¯s).  The legend is as for
Fig. 10.
































Fig. 13:The predicted log widths for charmonia mesons (c¯c).  The legend is as forFig. 10.




                                                             – 29 –
Fig. 14:The predicted log widths for charmed mesons (c       ¯d,c¯u,c¯s) with the legend as for
Fig. 10.





























Fig. 15:The predicted log widths for bottomed mesons (b¯u,b           ¯d,b¯s,b¯c).  The legend is as
forFig. 10.








                                                             – 30 –
Fig. 16:The predicted log widths forb          ¯bmesons.  The legend is as forFig. 10.














                                                    – 31 –