              Implicitly Restarted Lanczos Enables

  Chemically-Accurate Shallow Neural Quantum
                                                States


                                  Wei Liu†,‡   and Wenjie Dou∗,†,‡


 †Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Research Center for Industries of the

                Future, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310030, China
‡Institute of Natural Sciences, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, Zhejiang

                                               310024, China


                                   E-mail:  wenjiedou@westlake.edu.cn


                                                  Abstract

          The variational optimization of high-dimensional neural network models,  such as

      those used in neural quantum states (NQS), presents a significant challenge in machine

      intelligence.  Conventional first-order stochastic methods (e.g., Adam) are plagued by

      slow convergence, sensitivity to hyperparameters, and numerical instability, preventing

      NQS from reaching the high accuracy required for fundamental science. We address this

      fundamental optimization bottleneck by introducing the implicitly restarted Lanczos

      (IRL) method as the core engine for NQS training.  Our key innovation is an inherently

      stable second-order optimization framework that recasts the ill-conditioned parameter

      update  problem  into  a  small,  well-posed  Hermitian  eigenvalue  problem.   By  solving

      this problem efficiently and robustly with IRL, our approach automatically determines

      the  optimal  descent  direction  and  step  size,  circumventing  the  need  for  demanding

      hyperparameter tuning and eliminating the numerical instabilities common in standard

                                                       1
       iterative solvers.  We demonstrate that IRL enables shallow NQS architectures (with

       orders of magnitude fewer parameters) to consistently achieve extreme precision (1e-

       12  kcal/mol)  in  just  3  to  5  optimization  steps.   For  the  F2  molecule,  this  translates

       to  an  approximate  17,900-fold  speed-up  in  total  runtime  compared  to  Adam.   This

       work  establishes  IRL  as  a  superior,  robust,  and  efficient  second-order  optimization

       strategy for variational quantum models, paving the way for the practical, high-fidelity

       application of neural networks in quantum physics and chemistry.


Introduction


The  emergence  of  neural  quantum  states  (NQS)  has  provided  a  powerful  new,  scalable

paradigm  for  representing  quantum  many-body  wave  functions. 1–21  Highly  accurate  pre-

dictions from NQS—which are intrinsically flexible trial wave functions optimized via varia-

tional15–18 or diffusion19–21 Monte Carlo (VMC/DMC)—are contingent upon both the NQS

architecture’s sufficient expressive power and the effective optimization of its variational pa-

rameters. However, despite the architectural flexibility of NQS, achieving chemically accurate
results faces significant optimization hurdles.  Conventional first-order stochastic methods,

such  as  stochastic  gradient  descent  (SGD)  and  Adam,22  are  widely  used  but  suffer  from

painfully slow convergence, high sensitivity to hyperparameters, and numerical instabilities

in  flat  energy  landscapes.   Conversely,  more  powerful  second-order  algorithms—including

the Newton,23  approximate Newton,24  linear method (LM),25–28  and stochastic reconfigu-

ration  (SR)29–31  methods—are  generally  more  efficient  but  suffer  from  a  major  limitation

in the modern NQS era.  These methods are currently constrained by their need to explic-

itly build and store large matrices, such as the quantum geometric tensor (QGT)Sand the

effective HamiltonianH                           eff, whose size scales quadratically with the number of variational pa-

rameters (O(P        2)).  Given that modern NQS typically employ tens of thousands to millions

of  parameters,  this  quadratic  scaling  renders  these  second-order  approaches  computation-
ally intractable due to both immense memory consumption and prohibitive wall-clock time.

                                                          2
Thus,  to  make  NQS  truly  effective  and  circumvent  the  computational  burden  of  massive

architectures, it is imperative to develop optimization methods that achieve the efficiency of

second-order techniques without suffering from their memory and scaling limitations.

    The LM and SR optimization methods, which are foundational second-order techniques

in  NQS,  reduce  the  optimization  task  to  solving  either  a  system  of  linear  equations  or  a

linear eigenvalue problem.  The matrices involved (SandH             eff) are determined by stochas-

tic sampling within the VMC framework.  The essential difficulty, as discussed, is that the

dimension of these matrices equals the square of the number of variational parameters (P),

making their explicit construction and storage computationally infeasible whenPscales up,

a  common  occurrence  in  modern  NQS.  To  overcome  this  critical  bottleneck,  we  propose

solving the central linear algebra problems of these optimization methods by utilizing iter-
ative  Krylov  subspace  algorithms.   Crucially,  these  solvers  do  not  require  the  matrices  to

be built explicitly.  Instead, they only require the efficient evaluation of matrix-vector prod-

ucts (MVPs), which we demonstrate to be far less computationally expensive than actually

constructing the full matrices .  In the context of VMC, this approach is made particularly

efficient by evaluating these MVPs on-the-fly during the stochastic sampling process.  Since

each sampled configuration contributes an outer product to the overall matrix, operating by

the matrices during sampling allows us to compute the required MVPs without ever needing

to store the largeO(P                 2) matrices, enabling us to treat massive NQS efficiently.

    In this work, we will demonstrate this approach by using the implicitly restarted Lanczos

(IRL)  to  improve  the  SR  method.   Instead  of  directly  approximating  the  inverse  of  the

ill-conditioned  QGT  via  iterative  linear  solvers,  we  exploit  the  mathematical  equivalence
between  the  SR  update  and  the  generalized  eigenvalue  problem  (GEVP):H                    effv=λSv.

We introduce the IRL as the robust, second-order solver for this GEVP. The IRL method

efficiently extracts the smallest eigenvalueλ         min and its corresponding eigenvectorv           min from a

small, dynamically generated Krylov subspace.  This approach bypasses the ill-conditioning

ofSand provides a step directionv                          min whose magnitude is intrinsically determined by the


                                                          3
energy differenceλ                     min, thereby eliminating the need for external learning rate tuning (η).  We

demonstrate that the IRL-GEVP framework transforms NQS optimization into a numerically

stable  and  highly  efficient  learning  paradigm.   This  unprecedented  stability  and  efficiency

enables shallow NQS architectures to achieve performance previously restricted to deep or

massive  networks.   Our  results  show  that  this  approach  reliably  and  consistently  reaches

chemical accuracy (and often far surpasses it), successfully bridging the long-standing gap

between the theoretical promise of NQS and their practical utility in computational quantum

science.


Results

The IRL Framework for Robust Second-Order Optimization

The variational optimization of a neural quantum state|ψ     θ⟩aims to find parametersθthat

minimize  the  energyE(θ)  =⟨ψ            θ|H|ψ   θ⟩/⟨ψ   θ|ψ θ⟩.   The  SR  update  rule  is  derived  from  a

first-order expansion of the imaginary-time evolution, 32  leading to a linear system for the

parameter update ∆θ:

                                                    S∆θ=−ηF                                                        (1)

whereFis the energy gradient vector,Sis the QGT, andηis a learning rate.  Solving this
system via iterative methods like CG is prone to the numerical instabilities caused by the

ill-conditioned matrixS.                  31

    Our  central  methodological  contribution  is  to  reformulate  this  optimization  task  into

a  Hermitian  eigenvalue  problem.   We  achieve  this  by  noting  that  the  optimal  parameter

update  in  the  SR  framework  can  be  obtained  by  minimizing  the  Rayleigh  quotient  of  an

effective Hamiltonian  ˜H(see Methods for detailed construction).  This allows us to rewrite

the problem as:
                                                        ˜Hv=λv                                                       (2)



                                                            4
The lowest eigenvectorv  min of this problem yields the optimal parameter update ∆θ∝v          min.

Crucially,  this transformation automatically determines the ideal energy descent step and

direction, eliminating the manual tuning of the learning rate hyperparameter and enhancing

numerical stability.

    We solve this eigenvalue problem using the Algorithms 1 and 2.  As illustrated schemat-

ically in Fig.  1, IRL iteratively builds a Krylov subspace in the parameter space, efficiently

and stably converging to the extremal eigenvectors without the need for explicit matrix in-

version or the severe loss of orthogonality that plagues the standard Lanczos (SL) 33 method,

particularly on high-dimensional, noisy optimization landscapes.

















Figure 1:Schematic of the IRL-Optimized NQS Optimization Framework.a, The
traditional first-order stochastic optimization landscape (e.g., Adam) is noisy and requires
careful  tuning  of  the  learning  rate  (η).   b,  Our  approach  reformulates  the  second-order
parameter update as an eigenvalue problem in the neural network’s parameter space.  c, The
IRL method stably solves this problem,  finding the optimal descent direction (red arrow)
and step size automatically, enabling robust navigation of the optimization landscape.



Efficiency and Numerical Stability of IRL Optimization

To fundamentally assess the efficiency and stability of our proposed IRL optimizer, we first

visualized its optimization trajectory against conventional methods in calculations of the F2

molecule.  As shown in Fig.  2a, the variational energy error landscape forms a complex, high-

                                                       5
dimensional surface in parameter space.  The trajectory of the conventional first-order Adam

optimizer (Fig.  2b, c) is tortuous and protracted, requiring over 10,000 steps to approach

the global minimum and exhibiting characteristic instability.  The SL method, while offering

a more direct descent path, fails to converge after 50 steps due to accumulating numerical

instability and loss of orthogonality.  In stark contrast,  the IRL optimizer demonstrates a

near-ideal descent trajectory, navigating efficiently and robustly to the global minimum in

merely 5 steps. This dramatic difference underscores IRL’s capability to overcome the critical

challenges of noise and ill-conditioning that plague other second-order iterative methods.

    The practical impact is further quantified by the total wall-clock time required to achieve

the highest possible accuracy for the F2 molecule.  The Adam optimizer required 91.2 seconds

to complete 10,000 steps and failed to reach the global minimum.  The SL method completed
50 steps in 0.272 seconds (a 335×speed-up over Adam) but also failed.  Remarkably,  the

IRL optimizer achieved the global minimum in only 5.1 milliseconds, demonstrating a total

runtime speed-up of approximately 17,900-fold over Adam’s procedure.

    This  superior  convergence  efficiency  is  validated  by  its  scaling  behaviour  with  model

size (N  p) (Fig.  2d).  The performance of the first-order Adam optimizer exhibits a strong

dependence onN  p, adhering to a distinctN     −1.44p       scaling law, indicating that achieving high

accuracy with larger networks becomes progressively more difficult.  Conversely, both SL and

IRL demonstrate remarkable robustness, showing no significant scaling relationship withN          p.

This independence from the model’s complexity is a hallmark of a numerically stable and

physically grounded optimization strategy, crucial for scaling NQS to more complex systems

in quantum machine learning.


Shallow NQS Achieve Unparalleled Accuracy and Efficiency

We conducted a comprehensive benchmark across diverse molecules to quantify the perfor-
mance of our IRL-optimized NQS. Table 1 summarizes the results, emphasizing the absolute

error (ε  abs), convergence speed (Steps), and required network complexity (Parameters,N                       p).


                                                        6
Figure  2:Optimization  landscape  and  trajectories  for  different  NQS  training
methods,  with  a  base  neural  network  size  of  5,622  parameters.    (a)Three-
dimensional representation of the variational energy error surfaceε               abs =|E     NQS−E    FCI|as a
function of two shifted hyperparametersθ  1 andθ        2, with the global minimum corresponding
to FCI accuracy (the origin (0,0) is shifted to align with the global minimum for visualiza-
tion clarity).(b)Two-dimensional projection with optimization paths for Adam, standard
Lanczos (SL), and implicitly restarted Lanczos (IRL) methods.(c)Convergence behavior
showing IRL reaching the global minimum in only 5 steps (5.1 milliseconds), compared to
10,000  Adam  steps  (91.2  seconds)  and  50  SL  steps  (0.272  seconds)  that  fail  to  converge.
Data are from F2  molecule calculations.(d)Performance scaling with model size for the
F2  molecule.  As the network dimension (e.g., number of hidden units or layers) increases,
Adam’s optimization behavior exhibits a clear scaling trend.  In contrast, both SL and IRL
demonstrate robust stability, showing minimal dependence on the model’s scale.  All calcu-
lations were performed with a fixed random seed of 111.




                                                         7
    The key finding is the dual advantage of extreme precision and parameter efficiency (com-

pactness).  For every system tested, our IRL-optimized shallow NQS consistently achieves ex-

treme precision, with errors on the order of 10−10   to 10−12   kcal/mol.  This accuracy surpasses

not only all other NQS approaches but also high-level non-variational quantum chemistry

methods like coupled-cluster Singles-Doubles with perturbative Triples (CCSD(T)). 34

    More  importantly  for  machine  intelligence,  this  is  achieved  using  orders  of  magnitude

fewer  parameters  (N  p)  than  the  large  NQS  optimized  with  Adam  (e.g.,  718  parameters

vs.  150,000 for H         2).  This confirms that the robust second-order optimization provided by

IRL is highly effective at exploiting the expressive power of shallow architectures, avoiding

the common machine learning strategy of needing to exponentially increase model size to

compensate for poor optimization.
    Furthermore, the IRL optimizer converges robustly in just 3 to 5 steps for all molecules,

irrespective of system size or complexity (PVCs up to∼4.1×10                   7).  This is a sharp contrast

to the Adam optimizer,  which necessitates 50,000 steps while yielding significantly higher

errors.  This systemic stability and efficiency demonstrate that IRL provides a robust and

scalable learning framework for high-dimensional variational problems.


Robust  Optimization  in  the  Strong  Correlation  Regime:   Bond

Breaking

A stringent test for any high-dimensional machine learning model used in physical simulation

is its stability and convergence in regions characterized by strong correlation, such as chemical

bond dissociation.  In optimization terms,  strong correlation corresponds to a highly non-

convex, multi-modal, and severely ill-conditioned loss landscape, posing an extreme challenge
for standard optimization routines.  We applied our IRL-NQS approach to map the bond

dissociation curve of the N2 molecule, a classic multi-reference benchmark.  Figure 3 presents

the  total  energy  as  a  function  of  the  N-N  bond  length,  comparing  our  shallow  IRL-NQS

results with Hartree-Fock,35  CCSD(T),34  and the near-exact full configuration interaction

                                                        8
Table 1: Performance comparison of neural quantum states (NQS) across molecular systems.
For each system, we report the total orbitals (N  o), electrons (N  e), and number of physically
valid configurations (PVCs).  The shallow NQS trained with our implicitly restarted Lanczos
(IRL) method achieves extreme numerical precision (ε  abs∼10 −10  –10−12   kcal/mol) in only
2–5 optimization steps, outperforming standard Lanczos (SL), Adam-optimized NQS, and
CCSD(T) while using orders of magnitude fewer hyperparameters (N  p).  All calculations use
the STO-3G basis set.


Molecule        System           IRL-NQS (Ours)             SL-NQS                       Adam-NQS              CCSD(T)
             No  Ne   PVCsN     p    Stepsε           abs      Np    Stepsε           abs     Np    Steps ε           abs             εabs
H2             4     2       4      7.2e2     2     4.6e-12  7.2e2     2     6.1e-5  1.5e5  5.0e4         8.3e-3           9.8e-7
LiH           12    4    2.3e2   2.7e3     3     1.9e-11  2.7e3     31     1.7e-5  6.3e5  5.0e4         6.0e-2           3.4e-3
H2O         14   10   4.4e2   3.3e3     5     1.3e-10  3.3e3    100    8.0e-4  7.5e5  5.0e4         9.0e-2           7.6e-2
H2S          22   18   3.0e3   6.5e3     5     2.5e-10  6.5e3    100    7.9e-4  7.5e5  5.0e4         4.8e-1           4.2e-2
NH3          16   10   3.1e3   4.0e3     5     2.2e-11  4.0e3    100    9.7e-4  9.1e5  5.0e4         1.4e-1           1.4e-1
CH4          20   10   1.6e4   4.8e3     5     2.8e-10  4.8e3    100    9.2e-3  1.1e6  5.0e4         6.3e-2           1.5e-1
N2            20   14   1.4e4   5.6e3     5     3.3e-10  5.6e3    100    7.2e-5  9.1e5  5.0e4         3.2e-1              1.4
LiF           20   12   4.4e4   5.6e3     5     1.3e-10  5.6e3    100    8.0e-4  1.1e6  5.0e4         9.2e-1           6.3e-2
LiCl          28   20   1.0e6   9.6e3     5     4.8e-10  9.6e3    100    2.3e-3  1.4e6  5.0e4           1.7              2.5e-1
Li2O         30   14   4.1e7   1.1e4     5     5.8e-10  1.1e4    100    2.9e-3  1.7e6  5.0e4           1.1              2.7e-1
 Parameter Efficiency    SameN            p as SL    SameN            p as IRL  100–200×more params        –
 Convergence Speed           2–5 steps            2–100 steps               50,000 steps                –


(FCI)36 reference where available.

    The comparison starkly highlights the limitations of methods reliant on single-reference

approximations.  Hartree-Fock fails qualitatively, showing an unphysical energy rise at large

separations.   CCSD(T),  while  highly  accurate  near  the  equilibrium  minimum  (the  single-
reference  regime),  diverges  dramatically  at  larger  bond  lengths  (R >2.5R     e)  due  to  its

inability to properly capture the complex, multi-reference electronic structure.  In contrast,

our IRL-NQS results demonstrate near-perfect agreement with the high-accuracy FCI calcu-

lations across the entire dissociation range (see Figure 3).  This robust agreement—achieved

with a shallow NQS architecture—serves as definitive evidence that the IRL second-order

optimizer maintains its numerical stability and convergence efficacy even when navigating

the highly rugged, ill-conditioned optimization landscape of the strong correlation regime.

This capability establishes the IRL-NQS framework as a numerically superior and reliable

variational method for describing challenging chemical processes that require strong electron

correlation capture.

                                                                 9
Figure  3:  Bond  dissociation  curve  of  the  N2  molecule  computed  using  various  electronic
structure  methods,  including  Hartree–Fock,  CCSD(T),  FCI,  and  the  IRL-NQS  approach
introduced in this work.  The total energy (in Hartree) is plotted as a function of the N–N
bond length (in ˚A). The IRL-NQS results demonstrate close agreement with high-accuracy
FCI calculations across the dissociation range.

Discussion


We have introduced a novel, robust second-order optimization paradigm for high-dimensional

variational machine learning models by seamlessly integrating the IRL method into the SR

framework.  This algorithmic breakthrough directly resolves the long-standing critical issues

of  numerical  instability  and  hyperparameter  sensitivity  that  have  curtailed  the  practical

application of NQS to high-precision quantum chemistry.

    The efficacy of our approach is rooted in the superior numerical properties of IRL. By

reformulating  the  ill-conditioned  natural  gradient  linear  systemS∆θ=−Finto  a  stable

Hermitian eigenvalue problem, IRL achieves two critical objectives:  (i) The method intrinsi-
cally extracts the optimal energy descent direction and ideal step size, effectively eliminating

the  demanding  manual  tuning  of  the  learning  rate,  a  major  bottleneck  in  all  stochastic

methods.  (ii) The implicit restarting mechanism actively filters spurious eigenvectors (noise)

and maintains the orthogonality of the Krylov basis vectors, preventing the convergence col-

lapse typically seen when conventional iterative solvers encounter the highly ill-conditioned

QGT. This stability is particularly crucial for training shallow network architectures, allow-


                                                        10
ing them to fully realize their expressivity without relying on excessive parameter counts to

compensate for poor optimization.

    Our systematic benchmarking confirms that this strategy represents a fundamental al-

gorithmic  advance,  moving  beyond  incremental  improvements  in  convergence  rate.   The

reliable attainment of sub-chemical accuracy (ε  abs∼10 −10 −10 −12    kcal/mol) in just 3 to

5 steps—coupled with the ability to use shallow networks—signifies that the ultimate pre-

cision  of  NQS  is  primarily  limited  by  the  optimization  method  itself,  not  necessarily  the

architectural size.  This dual gain in accuracy and parameter efficiency is the key to scal-

ing NQS to larger, chemically-relevant systems where both computational cost and model

complexity are primary constraints.  Furthermore, the demonstrated success in the N2 bond

breaking  curve  validates  IRL’s  generalizability  to  the  strong  correlation  (multi-reference)
regime, where standard single-reference methods like CCSD(T) fail.

    The IRL optimization framework offers a solid foundation for future variational research.

Immediate applications include extending its reach to challenging chemical problems such

as  transition  metal  chemistry,  excited  state  calculations,  and  molecular  dynamics  in  non-

equilibrium  geometries,  all  of  which  demand  the  type  of  robust,  high-fidelity  convergence

demonstrated here.  More broadly, the success of leveraging advanced numerical linear alge-

bra techniques, specifically the stable Krylov subspace projection, opens a new direction for

optimizing complex high-dimensional machine learning models in physics and other scientific

domains.  Future algorithmic extensions could explore alternative Krylov subspace methods

like  the  Davidson  method37  or  block-Lanczos  methods  to  further  exploit  problem-specific

structures and potentially achieve linear scaling for even larger parameter spaces.
    In conclusion, our work bridges the long-standing gap between the theoretical expressivity

of  neural  network  quantum  states  and  their  practical  utility,  establishing  IRL-NQS  as  a

competitive, reliable, and highly efficient tool forab  initioelectronic structure theory that

sets a new standard for high-precision variational optimization.




                                                        11
Methods

The IRL for Wavefunction Optimization

The foundation of our robust optimization strategy for NQS is the seamless integration of

the IRL method within the SR framework.  This innovation provides a numerically stable
and efficient alternative to conventional iterative linear solvers plagued by ill-conditioning,

primarily by reformulating the ill-posed parameter update problem into a well-defined Her-

mitian eigenvalue problem.


From SR to a Stable Eigenvalue Problem

The standard SR method is a second-order optimization technique that computes the steep-

est descent direction ∆θin the Riemannian manifold of the NQS.       38  This involves solving

the ill-conditioned linear system:

                                                  S∆θ=−ηF,                                                        (3)

whereSis the QGT andFis the energy gradient.

    We circumvent the numerical instability of invertingSby adopting the Linear Method

(LM), which is asymptotically equivalent to SR but rooted in the Rayleigh-Ritz variational

principle.39 The LM seeks the optimal update vectorv= ∆θby minimizing the energy of
the linearized wavefunctionψ      ′ in the local tangent space:


                                                       pX                  pX
                                 ψ′(v)≈ψ(θ) +              vi∂ψ(θ)∂θi    =    cjχj.                                   (4)
                                                      i=1                 j=0

Here,c=  [1,v                  1,...,vp]⊤  is  the  coefficient  vector,  and{χ     j}pj=0   are  the  basis  functions

{ψ,∂ θ1ψ,...,∂θpψ}.  The problem is to minimize the Rayleigh quotientE[ψ    ′]:


                                      E[ψ ′] =λ=  ⟨ψ ′| ˆH|ψ  ′⟩⟨ψ ′|ψ′⟩    =c† ˜Hcc† ˜Sc.                                         (5)




                                                         12
where  ˜Hij =⟨χ  i| ˆH|χ  j⟩and   ˜Sij =⟨χ  i|χ j⟩are the full (p+ 1)×(p+ 1) Hermitian matrices.

    To find the minimumλ, we apply the variational condition by taking the derivative of

E[ψ ′] with respect toc † andcand setting them to zero:


                                                ∂λ
                                                ∂c †  = 0    and  ∂λ∂c   = 0.                                                  (6)

Since the two resulting equations are equivalent under a conjugate transpose operation, they

provide the same solution set forc.  Therefore, when deriving the GEVP, it is sufficient to
impose only one of the two independent variational conditions (∂λ∂c   = 0 or ∂λ∂c  †  = 0) to obtain

the complete GEVP form.  The choice to use ∂λ∂c  †  = 0 is a standard mathematical convention.

Using the quotient rule and matrix derivatives (N=c   † ˜Hc,D=c   † ˜Sc):

                                                1
                                               D2    D∂N∂c †−N  ∂D∂c †       = 0.                                              (7)


Substituting ∂N∂c  †  =  ˜Hcand  ∂D∂c  †  =  ˜Sc:


                                                 D(    ˜Hc)−N(          ˜Sc) = 0.                                                 (8)


SubstitutingN/D=λ(and cancelingD), we arrive at the GEVP:


                                                         ˜Hc=λ      ˜Sc.                                                         (9)


The optimal update is given by the eigenvectorc           min corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue

λmin.

    To simplify the problem, we adopt the standard VMC convention that the NQS wave-

function is normalized,⟨ψ|ψ⟩= 1.  This ensures the current energy expectation isE(θ) =

⟨ψ|     ˆH|ψ⟩.  To reduce the problem to thep×pparameter sub-space and ensureλ                                         min represents

the energy reduction (∆E) rather than the absolute energy (E            new), we employ the energy



                                                               13
centering technique.  We define the centered Hamiltonian operator  ˆH′ =  ˆH−E(θ)            ˆI.

     In the parameter sub-space spanned by the derivatives{|∂   θiψ⟩}, the effective Hamiltonian

matrixH               eff is defined using the centered operator  ˆH′ =  ˆH−E(θ):


                      [H eff]ij =⟨∂  θiψ|   ˆH′|∂ θjψ⟩=⟨∂     θiψ|   ˆH|∂  θjψ⟩−E(θ)⟨∂        θiψ|∂  θjψ⟩.                 (10)


The energy expectation value is computed using the VMC technique:
                                                                                      " ˆHψ(x)     #
                                E(θ) =  ⟨ψ|     ˆH|ψ⟩              P|ψ(x)|            2              .
                                              ⟨ψ|ψ⟩           =Xx      x′|ψ(x  ′)|  2     ψ(x)


We define the local energy  ˆEloc(x) as the ratio of the Hamiltonian acting on the wavefunction

to the wavefunction itself:
                                                      ˆEloc(x) =      ˆHψ(x)ψ(x)   .                                                  (11)


The expectation value can then be expressed as the Monte Carlo average of the local energy

with respect to the probability distributionP(x)∝|ψ(x)|                                               2:E(θ) =⟨           ˆEloc⟩P(x)    .  This local

quantity is essential as it allows us to formulate the derivative of the energy, and subsequently

theH       eff  matrix,  in  a  form  computable  through  stochastic  sampling.   By  employing  the
logarithmic derivative vectorO, whereO            i(x) =∂    θi lnψ(x;θ), this relation (Eq. 10) can be

compactly written in matrix form:


                                              Heff =⟨O|        ˆEloc|O⟩−E(θ)S,                                           (12)


whereS     ij  =⟨O  i|O j⟩is  the  QGT.  This  matrixH                 eff  is  equivalent  to  the  definition  using

connected correlation functions (subscriptc), [H                         eff]ij =⟨∂  θiψ|   ˆH|∂  θjψ⟩ c, confirming thatH         eff

contains only the fluctuations and correlations between the parameter space and the local
energy.

     This rigorous transformation leads to the final compact GEVP in parameter space, where



                                                                 14
vis the eigenvector:

                                                          Heffv=λSv.                                                      (13)

The solution to Eq. 13,λ      min, strictly represents the minimum value of the Rayleigh quotient

when restricted to the parameter sub-space:


                                                       λ= minv      v†Heffv
                                                                      v†Sv  .                                                   (14)

By  substituting  the  definition  of  the  energy-centered  effective  HamiltonianH                           eff  into  the

expression forλ      min:


                                                         v† ⟨O|     ˆH|O⟩−E(θ)S              v
                                        λmin = minv                     v†Sv                                                       (15)
                                                                               !
                                        λmin = minv         v†⟨O|     ˆH|O⟩v       −E(θ).                                    (16)
                                                                  v†Sv

We define the term within the parentheses asE    new:

                                                                                      !
                                             Enew = minv          v†⟨O|     ˆH|O⟩v       .                                         (17)
                                                                        v†Sv


Enew represents the lowest energy attainable by the updated wavefunctionψ      ′(v) within the

linear tangent space defined by the current parametersθ.

     Consequently,λ min is strictly the difference between this local minimum energy and the

current energy expectation:
                                                    λmin =E    new−E(θ).                                                 (18)

     The physical interpretation ofλ    min  is crucial for the optimization procedure.λ                min  rep-

resents  the  maximum  attainable  energy  reduction  (∆E)  during  the  current  optimization

iteration,  within  the  limits  of  the  linear  approximation.   Sinceλ           min  directly  provides  the

energy  difference  ∆E,  the  method  automatically  determines  the  optimal  step  size.   The

eigenvectorv           min  defines  the  descent  direction,  and  the  eigenvalueλ         min  implicitly  provides

                                                                  15
the necessary magnitude information.  As the optimization progresses and the current en-

ergyE(θ)  approaches  the  exact  ground  state  energyE                                exact,  the  locally  minimized  energy

Enew also converges towardsE         exact.  Consequently, the energy differenceλ                     min =E    new−E(θ)

approaches zero, naturally satisfying the convergence criterion.

    To leverage the efficiency and numerical stability of the IRL method,  we approximate

the GEVP by settingS≈Iin the metric of the dominant descent direction, converting it

into a standard Hermitian eigenvalue problem:


                                                       Heffv=λv.                                                       (19)


The optimal parameter update is then determined by the eigenvectorv           min corresponding to

the smallest eigenvalueλ         min:

                                                        ∆θ∝v           min.                                                       (20)

The physically meaningfulλ                        min automatically provides the optimal step size, eliminating the

challenging hyperparameter tuning required by traditional SR.


The Standard Lanczos Process and Implicit Restart

We solve the SHEP (Eq. 19) using the IRL algorithm. IRL builds upon the Standard Lanczos

(SL) process, a projection method used to construct an orthonormal basisV     m = [v 1,...,v m]

for them-dimensional Krylov subspace:


                                Km(H  eff,v 1) = span{v        1,H effv1,...,H m−1eff v1}.                             (21)












                                                             16
The  SL  process  uses  a  three-term  recurrence  relation  to  projectH        eff  onto  this  subspace,

yielding a small, symmetric tridiagonal matrixT      m∈R m×m    :

                                                                                    
                                               α1 β1                      

                                                 β1 α2  β2
                                       Tm =             β2    ...     ...               ,                                     (22)
                                                              ... αm−1   βm−1

                                                                    βm−1    αm


which satisfies the projection relationH                 effVm =V  mTm +β  mvm+1 e⊤m.  The eigenvalues ofT  m

are the Ritz values, which approximate the eigenvalues ofH    eff.
    The SL process is susceptible to numerical instability in finite-precision arithmetic, result-

ing in the loss of basis vector orthogonality and the appearance of spurious ghost eigenvalues.

IRL addresses this by implicitly applying a polynomial filter to the Krylov subspace.  This

filter, defined by the unwanted Ritz values{ν             1,...,νµ}(typically those farthest fromλ             min),

effectively suppresses undesired eigencomponents:


                             ψ(H     eff) = (H  eff−ν    1I)(H      eff−ν    2I)···(H       eff−ν  µI).                          (23)


Instead of explicitly computing this polynomial, IRL achieves the filtering robustly by per-

formingµsteps  of  the  shifted  QR  algorithm  on  the  small  matrixT               m.   This  procedure,

guaranteed  by  the  implicit  Q  theorem,40,41  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  restarting  the

Lanczos process with an optimally filtered starting vector, ensuring numerical stability and

guaranteed convergence to the extremal eigenpairv         min.


Practical Matrix-Free Implementation

For NQS optimization, the effective Hamiltonian matrixH               eff is never explicitly constructed,

as  its  memory  requirement  scales  prohibitively  asO(p           2)  forpparameters.   Instead,  the


                                                              17
Implicitly Restarted Lanczos (IRL) algorithm operates entirely through matrix-free compu-

tations, requiring only the matrix-vector productH          effvat each iteration.

    Thei-th component of this product is defined theoretically as [H            effv] i =Ppj=1 [H eff]ijvj.

Using the definition of the effective Hamiltonian matrix element [H eff]ij =E[O  ∗i (E  loc−E(θ))O       j]

and the linearity of the expectation operator, the product is efficiently estimated stochasti-

cally via Monte Carlo sampling (withN s samplesx       n) without explicitly forming the matrix:


                                        NsX                                      pX               !
                     [H effv] i≈   1Ns       O∗i (x n) (E  loc(x n)−E(θ))             Oj(x n)v j     ,                (24)
                                        n=1                                      j=1


whereE             loc(x n)  is  the  local  energyE              loc(x n)  =    ˆHψθ(x  n)ψθ(x  n)  ,  andO   i(x n)  = ∂lnψ      θ(x  n)∂θi       is  the  log-

derivative of the wavefunction for samplex      n.  This matrix-free operation ensures that the

computational cost of the IRL method scales linearly with the number of parametersp,O(p),

which is essential for large-scale NQS models.

    We configure the IRL algorithm to target only the lowest eigenpair (k= 1) with a typical

Krylov  subspace  dimension  ofm=  20.   A  stringent  convergence  tolerance  (τ =  10   −12  )
is  enforced  on  the  residual  norm,  ensuring  the  extreme  chemical  accuracy  necessary  for

fundamental scientific applications.  The superior efficiency of IRL is a result of its minimal

required step count (typically 3–5 steps), which provides a net gain in computational speed

despite a higher per-step cost compared to first-order methods.

    The complete IRL procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1, which highlights the explicit

construction of the Krylov subspaceK        m through the Lanczos process.  The superior overall

efficiency of IRL stems from the dramatically reduced number of optimization steps required

for convergence, despite a higher per-step cost.

    We analyze the computational complexity in terms of the number of Monte Carlo samples

(N s) and the number of network parameters (p).  For Adam/SGD, a single step requires the
estimation  of  the  energy  gradientF=  2Re(⟨O   †EL⟩c),  which  scales  asO(N    s·p).   While

the core operation of the IRL (and the Lanczos process) is the Matrix-Vector productw=


                                                           18
[H eff]v.  Critically, we do not explicitly construct the largeH               eff matrix.  Instead, the product

is evaluated efficiently and stochastically inO(N    s·p) time by exploiting the sampling identity

derived from the definition of connected correlations Eq. 24.

    The per-step cost of IRL,C        IRL, primarily involves the computation of this MVP, along

with  vector  updates  and  the  Rayleigh  quotient  calculation.   In  practice,  we  observe  that

the stochastic evaluation of [H effv] requires slightly more computation than the stochastic

evaluation of the gradientF.  This higher cost is quantified byC        IRL≈α·C         Adam, where the

overhead factor is typicallyα∈[2,5].

    However,  the  total  computational  cost  CostTotal  =  Steps×Cost         Per-step  overwhelmingly

favors  IRL.  To  reach  chemical  accuracy,  Adam  often  requires∼50,000  steps,  while  IRL

converges in∼5 to 50 steps (depending on the system complexity and Krylov subspace size
m).  This dramatic reduction in steps leads to a significant net gain in efficiency:


                                 CostIRLTotal ≈      5×C      IRL
                                 CostAdamTotal    50000×C                Adam≈   5·α50000≪1.


This demonstrates that the low iteration count of the IRL method far outweighs the mod-

erately  increased  cost  per  step,  making  it  the  superior  optimizer  for  high-accuracy  NQS

computations.


The Numerical Rationale for the S≈I Approximation

The variational optimization of NQS relies on second-order methods, which generally aim to

solve the GEVP associated with the LM or SR update:H           effv=λSv.  A primary numerical

challenge in this approach, particularly in large-scale NQS and strongly correlated regimes,

is  the  severe  ill-conditioning  of  the  QGT,S.   This  ill-conditioning  necessitates  the  use  of

external, heuristic regularization (S←S+ϵI) for traditional iterative linear solvers (like CG)
used in SR, a process that introduces its own instability and requires careful hyperparameter

(ϵ) tuning.



                                                           19
    Our  central  methodological  innovation,  the  IRL  framework,  strategically  employs  the

approximationS≈Ito transform the optimization problem.  This simplification allows us

to recast the GEVP as a numerically robust SHEP:H               effv=λv.  WhileS≈Irepresents

a theoretical departure from the exact geometric metric—particularly in strongly correlated

systems  where  parameter  redundancy  is  high—its  rationale  is  rooted  in  a  pragmatic  nu-

merical strategy that yields three critical advantages.  Firstly, the transformation effectively

eliminates the QGT’s ill-conditioning as a computational barrier, providing the IRL solver

with a stable environment for extracting the extremal eigenvectors.  Secondly, by solving the

SHEP, the optimal parameter update directionv                   min  and its magnitude (derived from the

minimal eigenvalueλ         min) are determined intrinsically, which entirely eliminates the need for

manual tuning of the external learning rate hyperparameter—a significant source of insta-
bility in conventional methods.  Finally, theS≈Isimplification, when combined with the

MVP strategy, ensures the overall complexity of the second-order update remains scalable

to millions of parameters, guaranteeing computational scalability.  The empirical success of

the IRL framework—demonstrated by its robust convergence and consistent high precision

on challenging, strongly correlated systems such as the N2 dissociation curve—validates this

approximation as a highly effective pragmatic strategy for achieving chemical accuracy in

NQS optimization.


Wave Function Ansatz

We employ a neural network variational ansatz formulated in the second-quantized frame-

work  to  represent  the  many-electron  wave  function. 15  The  electronic  Hamiltonian  in  this

representation is expressed as:

                                   ˆH= X      hpqˆc †pˆc q + 1X  gpqrsˆc †pˆc †qˆc rˆc s,                                    (25)

                                          pq              2  pqrs





                                                        20
whereh     pq  andg   pqrs  are one- and two-electron integrals, and ˆc †p  (ˆc p) are fermionic creation

(annihilation) operators for a given spin-orbitalp.

    The many-body wavefunction is expanded in the Fock space as:


                                                 |ψ⟩=  X      ψ(n)|n⟩,                                                 (26)
                                                           n

where|n⟩=|n                         1,n2,...,nM⟩denotes a basis state in the occupation number representation

for a system withMspin-orbitals, andn          i∈{0,1}due to the Pauli exclusion principle.  The
complex coefficientψ(n) is the wavefunction amplitude for configurationn.

    In our approach, a neural network serves as a variational function approximator forψ(n),

which we denote asψ  θ(n), parameterized byθ.  The network takes the occupation number

vectornas input and outputs a complex number, which we decompose into its amplitude

and phase:

                                              ψθ(n) =  ppθ(n)e   iϕθ(n) .                                             (27)

Here,p    θ(n) =|ψ    θ(n)|        2 defines a probability distribution over the Hilbert space, andϕ   θ(n)

is the configuration-dependent phase.


Autoregressive Modeling and Physical Constraints

By  the  product  rule  of  probability,  any  joint  distributionp         θ(n)  can  be  factorized  exactly
into a product of conditional distributions:


                                                           MY
                                              pθ(n) =         pθ(n i|n <i),                                              (28)
                                                          i=1

wheren     <i = (n  1,n2,...,ni−1   ) denotes the occupation numbers of all spin-orbitals preceding

thei-th orbital.  This factorization allows for efficient and exact sampling of configurations

nsequentially fromi= 1 toM, crucial for variational Monte Carlo calculations.

    To  ensure  the  physical  validity  of  the  sampled  configurations,  we  enforce  conservation


                                                             21
of the total number of spin-up electrons (N ↑) and spin-down electrons (N ↓) directly within

the autoregressive sampling process.  For each stepiin the sequential sampling, the condi-

tional probabilityp θ(n i|n <i) is dynamically adjusted to a restricted conditional probability

˜p θ(n i|n <i) based on the current electron counts:

                            
                               0,                 ifN  ↑(n <i,ni)>N ↑    orN ↓(n <i,ni)>N ↓,
           ˜p θ(n i|n <i) =                                                                                 (29)
                               pθ(n i|n <i),   otherwise.


Here,N   ↑(n <i,ni)  andN  ↓(n <i,ni)  are  the  cumulative  counts  of  spin-up  and  spin-down

electrons  after  considering  thei-th  orbital.   The  restricted  probabilities  are  subsequently

renormalized.   This  procedure  guarantees  that  every  generated  samplenbelongs  to  the

subspace with fixed particle numbers (N ↑,N↓), drastically reducing the effective size of the

Hilbert space and improving learning efficiency.


Acknowledgement


This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.  22273075

and 22361142829), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation (No.  XHD24B0301).


References


 (1)Carleo, G.; Troyer, M. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural

      networks.Science2017,355, 602–606.

 (2)Lange, H.; Van de Walle, A.; Abedinnia, A.; Bohrdt, A. From architectures to applica-

      tions:  A review of neural quantum states.Quantum Science and Technology2024,

 (3)Gu,  Y.;  Li,  W.;  Lin,  H.;  Zhan,  B.;  Li,  R.;  Huang,  Y.;  He,  D.;  Wu,  Y.;  Xiang,  T.;




                                                        22
Algorithm 1Implicitly Restarted Lanczos (IRL) for NQS Optimization
Require:Initial  parametersθ,  desired  eigenpairsk=  1,  Krylov  subspace  sizem=  20,
     toleranceτ= 10      −12
Ensure:Optimal update directionv                                      min, optimal step sizeλ        min
 1:Initialize random unit vectorv              1.  Setv       0←0,β         0←0   ▷Initialization for three-term
     recurrence
 2:µ←m−k                   ▷Number of unwanted Ritz values to shift/filter
 3:converged←False
 4:whilenot convergeddo
 5:    1.  Krylov Subspace Construction (Standard Lanczos):
 6:    forj= 1 tomdo
 7:    w←H             effvj        ▷Matrix-vector product via Monte Carlo (Eq. (24))
 8:    α j←v †jw                          ▷Diagonal elementT    m,j,j
 9:    w←w−α         jvj−β  j−1 vj−1    ▷Orthogonalization (Three-term recurrence)
10:    β  j←∥w∥                      ▷Subdiagonal elementT      m,j+1,j
11:        ifβ    j = 0then break
12:        end if                  ▷Breakdown (Invariant subspace found)
13:   v  j+1 ←w/β    j                    ▷Normalize to get next basis vector
14:   end for
15: V  m = [v 1,...,v m] forms the basis;T     m is the tridiagonal matrix.

16:   2.  Ritz Approximation:
17:   SolveT   mU=UΛ                ▷Eigendecomposition of the smallT             m
18: Y←V      mU                               ▷Compute Ritz vectors
19:   Select the lowest eigenpair (λ       1,y 1)

20:   3.  Convergence Check:
21:   res     norm←∥H              effy1−λ    1y1∥         ▷Residual norm of the lowest Ritz pair
22:   ifres      norm<τthen
23:   v     min←y     1,λ min←λ     1
24:        break
25:   end if
26:   4.  Implicit Restart (Basis Filtering):
27:   Selectµunwanted Ritz values{ν                                   1,...,νµ}as shifts.
28:   Applyµimplicit shifted QR iterations toT           m.
29:   Extract the newk-length basisV            k and the next starting vectorv     k+1  .
30: v     1,...,v k+1 ←new basis vectors      ▷Restart process with filtered basis
31:end while
32:returnv                     min,λ min


      Qin,  M.;  others  Solving  the  Hubbard  model  with  Neural  Quantum  States.arXiv

      preprint arXiv:2507.026442025,



                                                         23
Algorithm 2Standard Lanczos (SL) Process for Tridiagonal Reduction
Require:Hermitian matrixH                                    eff (implicit), initial unit vectorv           1, subspace sizem
Ensure:Orthonormal basisV             m = [v 1,...,v m], tridiagonal matrixT    m
 1:β   0←0,v         0←0                            ▷Initialize auxiliary variables
 2:forj= 1 tomdo
 3:  w←H             effvj                        ▷Matrix-vector product via Eq. (24)
 4:  α j←v †jw                       ▷Rayleigh quotient:α    j =⟨v  j,H effvj⟩
 5:  w←w−α         jvj                 ▷Orthogonalize against current basis vector
 6:    ifj >1then
 7:    w←w−β         j−1 vj−1            ▷Orthogonalize against previous basis vector
 8:    end if
 9:  β j←∥w∥                           ▷Compute subdiagonal element
10:   ifβ    j = 0then            ▷Invariant subspace found (lucky breakdown)
11:        break
12:   end if
13: v  j+1 ←w/β    j                     ▷Normalize to obtain next basis vector
14:end for
15:returnV         m,T m with elements{α      1,...,αm}and{β             1,...,βm−1 }


 (4)Li,  R.;  Liu,  Y.;  Jiang,  D.;  Chen,  Y.;  Wen,  X.;  Li,  W.;  He,  D.;  Wang,  L.;  Chen,  J.;

      Ren, W. Spin-Adapted Neural Network Wavefunctions in Real Space.arXiv  preprint

      arXiv:2511.016712025,

 (5)Fischer, A.; Igel, C.Iberoamerican congress on pattern recognition; Springer, 2012; pp

      14–36.

 (6)Carleo, G. et al. NetKet:  A Machine Learning Toolkit for Many-Body Quantum Sys-

      tems.SoftwareX2019, 100311.

 (7)Choo,  K.;  Mezzacapo,  A.;  Carleo,  G.  Fermionic  neural-network  states  for  ab-initio

      electronic structure.Nature communications2020,11, 2368.

 (8)Schmitt, M.; Heyl, M. Quantum many-body dynamics in two dimensions with artificial

      neural networks.Physical Review Letters2020,125, 100503.

 (9)Hibat-Allah, M.; Inack, E. M.; Wiersema, R.; Melko, R. G.; Carrasquilla, J. Variational
      neural annealing.Nature Machine Intelligence2021,3, 952–961.


                                                       24
(10)Vicentini,  F.;  Hofmann,  D.;  Szab´o,  A.;  Wu,  D.;  Roth,  C.;  Giuliani,  C.;  Pescia,  G.;

      Nys, J.;  Vargas-Calder´on, V.;  Astrakhantsev, N.;  others NetKet 3:  Machine learning

      toolbox for many-body quantum systems.SciPost Physics Codebases2022, 007.

(11)Pederson,  R.;  Kalita,  B.;  Burke,  K.  Machine  learning  and  density  functional  theory.

      Nature Reviews Physics2022,4, 357–358.

(12)Reh,  M.;  Schmitt,  M.;  G¨arttner,  M.  Optimizing  design  choices  for  neural  quantum

      states.Physical Review B2023,107, 195115.

(13)Passetti, G.; Hofmann, D.; Neitemeier, P.; Grunwald, L.; Sentef, M. A.; Kennes, D. M.

      Can neural quantum states learn volume-law ground states?Physical  Review  Letters

      2023,131, 036502.

(14)Wu, D.; Rossi, R.; Vicentini, F.; Astrakhantsev, N.; Becca, F.; Cao, X.; Carrasquilla, J.;

      Ferrari, F.; Georges, A.; Hibat-Allah, M.; others Variational benchmarks for quantum

      many-body problems.Science2024,386, 296–301.

(15)Liu,  W.;  Bi,  R.-H.;  Zhao,  C.;  Wang,  Y.;  Dou,  W.  Absorption  Spectra  with  Kernel

      Polynomial Neural Quantum States.The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters2025,

      16, 12216–12222.

(16)Bodendorfer, N.; Oktay, O.; Gautam, V.; Hanada, M.; Rinaldi, E. Variational Monte

      Carlo  with  neural  network  quantum  states  for  a  Yang-Mills  matrix  model.Physical

      Review D2025,112, 046010.

(17)Zhao, T.;  Stokes, J.;  Veerapaneni, S. Scalable neural quantum states architecture for

      quantum chemistry.Machine Learning:  Science and Technology2023,4, 025034.

(18)Wu,  Y.;  Guo,  C.;  Fan,  Y.;  Zhou,  P.;  Shang,  H.  NNQS-transformer:  an  efficient  and

      scalable neural network quantum states approach for ab initio quantum chemistry.Pro-




                                                        25
      ceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,

      Storage and Analysis2023, 1–13.

(19)Ren, W.; Fu, W.; Wu, X.; Chen, J. Towards the ground state of molecules via diffusion

      Monte Carlo on neural networks.Nature Communications2023,14, 1860.

(20)Han,  J.;  Lu,  J.;  Zhou,  M.  Solving  high-dimensional  eigenvalue  problems  using  deep

      neural  networks:   A  diffusion  Monte  Carlo  like  approach.Journal  of  Computational

      Physics2020,423, 109792.

(21)Brown,  D.  F.;  Gibbs,  M.  N.;  Clary,  D.  C.  Combining  ab  initio  computations,  neu-

      ral networks, and diffusion Monte Carlo:  An efficient method to treat weakly bound

      molecules.The Journal of chemical physics1996,105, 7597–7604.

(22)Kingma,   D.   P.   Adam:     A   method   for   stochastic   optimization.arXiv   preprint

      arXiv:1412.69802014,

(23)Umrigar, C.;  Filippi, C. Energy and variance optimization of many-body wave func-

      tions.Physical review letters2005,94, 150201.

(24)Sorella, S. Wave function optimization in the variational Monte Carlo method.Physical

      Review B—Condensed Matter and Materials Physics2005,71, 241103.

(25)Nightingale, M.; Melik-Alaverdian, V. Optimization of ground-and excited-state wave

      functions and van der Waals clusters.Physical review letters2001,87, 043401.

(26)Toulouse, J.; Umrigar, C. J. Optimization of quantum Monte Carlo wave functions by

      energy minimization.The Journal of chemical physics2007,126.

(27)Toulouse, J.; Umrigar, C. Full optimization of Jastrow–Slater wave functions with ap-

      plication to the first-row atoms and homonuclear diatomic molecules.The  Journal  of

      chemical physics2008,128.



                                                        26
(28)Umrigar,  C.;  Toulouse,  J.;  Filippi,  C.;  Sorella,  S.;  Hennig,  R.  G.  Alleviation  of  the

      fermion-sign  problem  by  optimization  of  many-body  wave  functions.Physical  review

      letters2007,98, 110201.

(29)Sorella, S. Generalized Lanczos algorithm for variational quantum Monte Carlo.Phys-

      ical Review B2001,64, 024512.

(30)Shulenburger, L.; Casula, M.; Senatore, G.; Martin, R. M. Correlation effects in quasi-

      one-dimensional quantum wires.Physical Review B—Condensed Matter and Materials

      Physics2008,78, 165303.

(31)Neuscamman, E.; Umrigar, C.; Chan, G. K.-L. Optimizing large parameter sets in vari-

      ational quantum Monte Carlo.Physical  Review  B—Condensed  Matter  and  Materials
      Physics2012,85, 045103.

(32)McArdle, S.; Jones, T.; Endo, S.; Li, Y.; Benjamin, S. C.; Yuan, X. Variational ansatz-

      based  quantum  simulation  of  imaginary  time  evolution.npj  Quantum  Information

      2019,5, 75.

(33)Prelovˇsek, P.; Bonˇca, J. Ground state and finite temperature Lanczos methods.Strongly

      Correlated Systems:  Numerical Methods2013, 1–30.

(34)Kowalski, K.; Piecuch, P. The method of moments of coupled-cluster equations and the

      renormalized CCSD [T], CCSD (T), CCSD (TQ), and CCSDT (Q) approaches.The

      Journal of Chemical Physics2000,113, 18–35.

(35)Slater, J. C. A simplification of the Hartree-Fock method.Physical  review1951, 81,

      385.

(36)Knowles, P. J.;  Handy, N. C. A new determinant-based full configuration interaction

      method.Chemical physics letters1984,111, 315–321.




                                                        27
(37)Crouzeix, M.; Philippe, B.; Sadkane, M. The davidson method.SIAM Journal on Sci-

      entific Computing1994,15, 62–76.

(38)Lin, T.; Zha, H. Riemannian manifold learning.IEEE transactions on pattern analysis

      and machine intelligence2008,30, 796–809.

(39)Yserentant, H. A Short Theory of the Rayleigh-Ritz Method.Comput. Methods Appl.

      Math.2013,13, 495–502.

(40)Vandebril, R.; Barel, M. V.; Mastronardi, N. An implicit Q theorem for Hessenberg-like

      matrices.Mediterranean Journal of Mathematics2005,2, 259–275.

(41)Watkins, D. S. Understanding the QR algorithm.SIAM review1982,24, 427–440.



































                                                       28
TOC Graphic






















































                            29