   Utility-scale quantum computational chemistry


                               Davide Castaldo and Markus Reiher∗


 Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 2,

                                          8093 Zurich, Switzerland


                                           E-mail:  mreiher@ethz.ch


                                                   Abstract

           Chemistry and materials science are widely regarded as potential killer application

       fields for quantum hardware.  While the dream of unlocking unprecedented simulation

       capabilities  remains compelling,  quantum algorithm  development must adapt  to  the

       evolving  constraints  of  the  emerging  quantum  hardware  in  order  to  accomplish  any

       advantage for the computational chemistry practice.  At the same time, the continu-

       ous advancement of classical wavefunction-theory methods narrows the window for a

       broad quantum advantage.  Here, we explore potential benefits of quantum computa-

       tion from the broader perspective of utility-scale applications.  We argue that quantum

       algorithms  need  not  only  enable  accurate  calculations  for  a  few  challenging,  that  is

       strongly correlated, molecular structures, that might be hard to describe with tradi-

       tional methods.  Instead, they must also support the practical integration of quantum-

       accelerated  computations  into  high-throughput  pipelines  for  routine  calculations  on

       arbitrary molecules, ultimately delivering a tangible value to society.


1  Introduction


The  past  decade  has  seen  a  rush  into  quantum  computation  applications, 1–6  with  many
focusing on chemical and materials science problems as these fields are believed to benefit

                                                         1
from this new computing paradigm significantly.7–10 How to define an associated quantum

advantage in a meaningful way has been the subject of ongoing considerations. 11,12 So far,

the demonstration of a quantum advantage for quantum chemistry on near-term quantum

computers mostly focused on strong electron correlation examples from the molecular world,

where traditional quantum chemical methods face severe challenges. 13,14 A prime example has

been the mechanism of nitrogenase7 which remains to be a conundrum and one of the Holy

Grails of research in chemistry.15–17 Many related problems can easily be formulated, such as

elucidation of the mode of action of the manganese cluster in photosystem II, 18–20 of the iron-

sulfur cluster in FeFe hydrogenases,21–23 or of Rieske dioxygenases.24,25 However, challenging

electronic structures are also found in other fields such as hetereogenous catalysis. 26

    As long as quantum algorithms are not competitive with traditional computations—due
to a limited number of logical qubits and limited execution times of current and mid-term

quantum computers—and as long as quantum computers are expensive to build and operate,

algorithms offering exponential speedups will continue to be a central focus of research. 27–30

These limitations forced research to focus on domains where classical methods fail.

    However, this point of view is too narrow for potentially useful applications in molecular

and  materials  science  as  there  exist  hardly  any  chemical  problems  where  a  single  high-

accuracy calculation will make a key difference.  Instead, many computational (and experi-

mental) results play in concert to create a consistent picture and solve a problem. 8,31,32 Hence,

many,  if not most,  of the calculations dedicated to solving a chemical puzzle will have to

deal with weakly correlated (single-reference) structures, for which coupled cluster models

have been established as a remarkably successful approach in the last three decades. 33–35
    Although traditional computational chemistry results may suffer from sizable errors, rea-

sonable chemical conclusions may still be drawn from them.36,37 In fact, this latter observa-

tion is one reason for the success of density functional theory in computational chemistry:

despite some dramatic failures (see Refs.  38–41 for some examples), it often delivers useful

results with sufficiently small errors.42–44 Still, the error of a specific calculation is unknown,


                                                        2
and therefore one usually attempts to infer its magnitude from a combination of known re-

sults for the system under study and from benchmark data for similar systems. Note that also

modern classical wavefunction methods45,46 suffer from unknown system-dependent errors.47

By contrast, quantum phase estimation (QPE) based approaches can guarantee an arbitrar-

ily  smallϵ-accurate  energy  estimate  (within  a  given  one-particle  basis),  given  a  sufficient

amount of quantum resources.48

    In  view  of  this  current  situation  in  computational  chemistry,  we  are  led  to  a  different

paradigm  for  quantum  computations  of  general  value  in  chemistry  and  materials  science.

This is one that demands utility-scale (fault-tolerant) quantum computations, done in par-

allel and routinely.  Rather than solely focusing on a quantum advantage, the new paradigm

would imply a far broader perspective for quantum computations.
    In  this  Perspective,  we  shall  therefore  address  key  questions  regarding  general  appli-

cability  of  quantum  computation:  what  is  its  value  for  general  computational  chemistry?

Is  it  meaningful  to  focus  on  strongly  correlated  molecules  to  be  simulated  on  a  quan-

tum computer?  How can we efficiently integrate current Quantum-Processing-Unit-(QPU)-

accelerated routines into multiscale simulations?

    We need to ponder these aspects carefully because we live in a world of limited resources

being exploited beyond sustainable limits .49,50 It is therefore imperative to assess whether,

from both an environmental and an economic perspective, the effort we are making to develop

and run these machines is reasonable .51 We will come back to this point in our conclusions.

    This work is organized as follows:  Section 2 discusses the current quantum computing

stack (i.e., the hierarchical conceptualization of the quantum computational workflow from
the user interface down to the physical instructions on the hardware),  necessary to break

down the analysis of utility-scale quantum computation for chemistry into different parts.

Subsequently Section 3 elaborates on the requirements and conditions under which an ideal

realization of the quantum computing stack could provide practical advantages over emerging

modern classical wavefunction approaches.  Finally, we summarize our discussion and point


                                                         3
towards future developments of quantum algorithms for chemistry.


2  The quantum computing stack

How does the path for useful quantum computation look like?  This question is concerning

scientists  in  academia  and  the  private  sector  all  over  the  world. 52  At  the  outset  of  the

computing era, programmers were forced to develop their codes in machine language, making

each software development incredibly challenging and virtually impossible to directly port on

another machine.  A major shift came with the introduction of compilers and Intermediate

Representations (IRs).53  These new tools enabled the creation of what is nowadays called

the computing stack:  a hierarchical conceptualization of any computational workflow from

the user interface down to the physical instructions on the hardware.  With the advent of

quantum  processors,54  a  natural  generalization  of  this  concept  to  quantum  computers  is

inevitable.  The quantum computing stack55 can be thought of six different layers:

    (i) At the bottom of the stack we have the hardware, i.e.  the physical substrate hosting
the computational device.  Several proposals for this substrate are currently under consider-

ation among the scientific community spanning different states of matter ranging from light,

molecules and solid states materials56 to more exotic topological phases ;57 the variety and

open competition among the different physical substrates reflects that no clear advantage

has  been  established  yet  for  any  of  the  main  proposals.   It  is  well  known  that  supercon-

ducting  qubits58  outperform  other  platforms  in  terms  of  repetition  rate  of  a  given  circuit

but, at the same time, they lag behind neutral atoms and ion-based platforms in terms of

connectivity.59–61  To this end,  we note that a superconducting-based architecture with an

effective all-to-all connectivity was recently proposed. 62,63 At the same time, photonic based

platforms can leverage the expertise acquired in the field of integrated photonics with photon

generations being cheap, fast, and able to operate at room temperature. 64,65
    (ii) Second, we have the physical qubits, that is, the particular two-level quantum states



                                                        4
within the hardware eigenspectrum used to actually perform computation.  This is followed

by (iii) the quantum error correcting code. The latter can be thought as a mappingCbetween

a quantum circuitQdefined on the set ofNphysical qubits to a quantum circuitQ           ′ defined on

the set ofN ′ logical qubits (C(Q) :Q−→Q      ′).  Such a mapping typically requires the encoding

of  the  logical  information  in  a  redundant  physical  space  and  the  use  of  error-correction

and  detection  algorithms66  to  avoid  information  loss  due  to  the  presence  of  an  external

environment and imperfect gate implementations.  (iv) The abstract objects resulting from

the error correcting procedure are defined as logical qubits, the set of operations, acting on

the logical qubit, which define the universal model of computation is referred to as Instruction

Set Architecture (ISA). (v) The Quantum Intermediate Representations (QIR) comprise a

middle layer of operations which enable a compiler friendly and hardware-agnostic procedure
to translate from the source code to the machine language.  (vi) The quantum algorithms

are high-level strategies to solve a computational task on the QPU.

    With this picture in mind, it is now easier to understand that for developing a quantum

algorithm  it  is  mandatory  to  think  of  the  overhead  incurred  by  compiling  our  algorithm

down through the whole quantum computing stack. It is worth considering in more detail this

overhead. If we consider the problem of connectivity, one must account for the fact that theN

physical qubits are separated in space after the original quantum circuit has been translated

in terms of the ISA. To implement some operations, depending on the architecture at hand,

additional gates are needed which can account for up toO(N) additional Control-NOT gates

(CNOTs) when only a linear nearest-neighbor connectivity is allowed. 67 Subsequently, one

must  take  into  account  the  computational  overhead  due  to  the  error  correcting  code.   As
noted  before,  quantum  error  correction  (QEC)  involves  the  mapping  of  the  initial  logical

circuit into a redundant space which is used to store the information (code space) and to

on-line detect the presence of an error by syndrome measurements and decoding by classical

algorithms68–70  .  Diving into the technical details of error-correction theory is beyond the

scope of this perspective but, for the purpose of our discussion, it is important to consider


                                                         5
the main factors that induce an overhead due to error correction.

    Particularly, in order to implement an error corrected circuit we need two ingredients:  (i)

a quantum memory (i.e.  the ability to store a quantum state idle) and (ii) a quantum logic

(i.e.   the  ability  to  perform  fault-tolerant  logical  operations).   Both  the  logical  operations

and the logical states are defined by the quantum error correcting code at hand.

    Each logical qubit is mapped into a set ofdataqubits and each logical operation acts

on them accordingly.  The latter point implies an additional overhead because not all the

gates can be implemented in a fault-tolerant manner with a trivial mapping from the logical

space  to  the  physical  space.71  Particularly,  a  typical  convention  in  the  QEC  literature  is

to  distinguish  betweentransversalandnon-transversalgates.   We  can,  intuitively,  define

as transversal each gate that, when mapped into the QEC circuit, is just the independent
application of the logical gate on each physical qubit. As an example of transversal operation,

we consider a 3-qubit encoding of a logical qubit (|0   L⟩−→|000⟩,|1             L⟩−→|111⟩);  if we want

to  apply  theX      L  gate  (i.e.   the  PauliXon  a  logical  qubitX                      L|0 L⟩=|1       L⟩),  we  then  have

to  apply  independently  theXgate  on  each  of  the  data  qubits,X                        L|0 L⟩=XXX|000⟩=

|1 L⟩.  Inevitably, not all operations will satisfy this property.  For those cases, we will need

additional ancilla (i.e., auxiliary) qubits to consume and measure.  When the non-transversal

gate used to achieve a universal gate set is theTgate, these additional sets of qubits are

calledTfactories.

    So  far,  we  have  introduced  two  sets  of  qubits:  one  used  to  encode  the  logical  qubits

and  another  one  used  to  perform  logical  operations.   To  construct  a  quantum  memory,

we  further  require  an  additional  set  of  qubits  to  detect  and  correct,  in  real-time,  errors
due  to  decoherence.   These  additional  qubits  are  referred  to  as  syndrome  qubits.   During

an  error  correction  cycle,  a  set  of  CZ  gates  is  applied  between  the  data  qubits  and  the

syndrome  qubits,  which  are  then  measured.   The  number  of  measurements  performed  is

related to the code distanced,  i.e.,  the maximum number of correctable errors in a given

QEC code. The resulting syndrome measurements form a dataset used to infer, via a classical


                                                             6
decoding algorithm, the inverse operatorE    −1   to be applied in order to correct the errorE.

Finally, to achieve full fault-tolerance, we must also account for the possibility that syndrome

measurements themselves could be faulty.  In such cases, an additional set of ancilla qubits

is required.

    All the current proposals for quantum error correction aim to minimize the overall time

required for an error correction cycle and the total number of additional qubits needed to

embed the logical circuit.  Particularly, the major contribution originates from the compu-

tational overhead required for the synthesis of the logicalTgates,       72–74 which is the basis of

the current estimates of fault-tolerant quantum simulations for chemistry. 55,75–77  Note the

advancement demonstrated by magic state cultivation . 78,79

    Since the goal of this Perspective is to contextualize the field of quantum computational
chemistry through the lens of utility, the above discussion on the quantum computing stack

shall make clear that many different factors kick in when it comes to determining the actual

cost  (i.e.   the  utility)  of  a  quantum  algorithm.   The  key  message  that  we  want  to  convey

so  far  is  that  the  inherent  nature  of  quantum  computers  calls  for  the  implementation  of

error correcting code but, at the same time, their cost calls for a serious reflection on the

conditions under which this is the best option and when other form of denoising are more

suitable.

    In the next paragraph, we will make use of a very recent model for scalability of quantum

processors80 to qualitatively delineate different regimes of compilation that one may want to

explore when developing quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry.

    Before proceeding with our discussion we note that scaling quantum hardware presents
distinct challenges across different architectures.  Ion-trap systems struggle with connectivity

at scale, as shuttling ions between trap zones becomes prohibitively slow.  While entangling

ions across separate traps using photonic links offers a potential solution, its implementa-

tion  remains  technically  demanding.81,82  Superconducting  qubits  face  fundamental  wiring

constraints,  because  the  sheer  density  of  control  lines  is  becoming  unmanageable  as  sys-


                                                         7
tems grow.  This and other challenges have been documented in detail for superconducting

platforms in Ref.  83.  Photonic approaches, based on Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill encoding 84

or  dual-rail  schemes,85  are  primarily  bottlenecked  by  photon  loss,  requiring  dramatic  im-

provements in transmission and detection efficiency.  Across all platforms, classical control

electronics and quantum operating systems must also advance significantly to manage the

complexity of large-scale quantum operations in real time. 83 Particularly, the last issue im-

plies that even scaling up the number of qubits and their quality would not necessarily imply

advancing the clock rate of the quantum processor.  Hence, we must assume an optimistic

perspective on these general hardware challenges for the discussion in the following sections.


2.1Different regimes of compilation

If we assume that each operation on a quantum computer fails with a probabilityp   gate, and

that  all  such  failure  events  are  independent,  then  the  probability  that  a  quantum  circuit

is  executed  without  any  errors  is  given  byp   success  =  (1−p         gate)#gates.   Since  the  fidelity
F=|⟨Ψ          exact|Ψ⟩|     2 is affected by the probability of successfully running the circuit, as a first

approximation, we may assume that the two are identical:



                                        F=p       success = (1−p         gate)#gates .                                          (1)

    If a full-fledged error-corrected quantum computer is realized, it would imply that error-

correcting  codes  are  capable  of  counteracting  this  exponential  decay  in  fidelity.   In  fact,

this is formalized in the celebrated threshold theorems,86,87 which guarantee that increasing

the  code  distance  (i.e.,  the  number  of  correctable  errors)  allows  an  error-correcting  code
to exponentially suppress logical error rates,  provided that the physical error rate of each

gate is below a code-dependent threshold valuep         th.  An experimental demonstration of this

principle has been recently reported in Refs.  88,89 where the authors employ the surface

code at different code distancesd, usingd                                  2 physical qubits andd        2−1 syndrome measurements



                                                            8
to encode a single logical qubit.

    In  this  section,  we  aim  to  use  Eq.  (1)  to  suggest  that  the  development  of  quantum

algorithms—alongside advances in hardware—calls for different compilation paradigms de-

pending on the size/quality of the available QPU. In Fig. 1, we show the fidelity of circuit

execution as a function of the number of physical qubits and the number of gates.  To com-

puteFwe used Eq. (1) also accounting for qubit degradation that can arise when scaling

up quantum hardware architectures, as previously discussed in Ref.  80.  For the purposes

of this discussion, we have also plotted three (solid) contour lines corresponding to decreas-

ing values ofF.  The values ofF,  which determine the position of these lines,  depend on

the specific hardware and, in particular, on that hardware feature which mostly affects the

denoising scheme considered in our compilation.  Error mitigation speed is mostly affected
by the repetition rate of a quantum processor, while the error correction and detection are

strongly dependent on the connectivity of the architecture which enforces constraints on the

code that can be hosted on a given QPU. Due to the exponential decay ofF, these contours

suggest the existence of four distinct operational regimes for a quantum computer.

    As discussed above, implementing an error correction protocol entails a substantial over-

head in computational resources,  including qubits,  gates,  and measurements.  Hence,  it is

reasonable to consider alternative strategies that have been proposed in the literature, such

as Quantum Error Mitigation90  (QEM) and Quantum Error Detection91,92  (QED), where

we trade a lower computational overhead, in terms of additional physical qubits and gates,

for worse performance, in terms of error reduction.

    QEM  is  generally  considered  in  the  context  of  estimating  the  expectation  value  of  an
observable  using  a  quantum  circuit  by  reducing  the  noise-induced  bias. 93,94  This  is  done

through post-processing of the measurement outcomes from an ensemble of circuit imple-

mentations.   Consequently,  most  error  mitigation  techniques  require  additional  sampling

that increases with the noise in the circuit; unfortunately, this results in an asymptotically

unfavorable scaling.90 By contrast, QED uses, in the same spirit of the syndrome measure-


                                                        9
Figure 1:  Quantum circuit fidelityFmodeled according to the scalability framework pro-
posed  in  Ref.   80.   Fidelity  decreases  exponentially  with  the  number  of  gates,  following
Eq. (1).  The gate error probabilityp   gate decreases with the number of physical qubitsQand
is given byp   gate =p    0Q1/s , wheresandp                       0 are the hardware-dependent scalability factor and
average error rate, respectively.  Here we sets= 4 andp              0 = 0.0001.














                                                               10
ments discussed above, measurements on ancilla qubits to detect the presence of an error.

Within this scheme, each measurement flagging an error is discarded for the purpose of the

calculation.91,92 Giving that QEM typically requires no additional physical qubits and QED

only  requires  a  few  additional  qubits  per  computational  qubit,  we  can  foresee  four  differ-

ent compilation regimes matching the continuous evolution of quantum hardware.  In the

following, we discuss each of these regimes.


Full QEM compilation

In this first setting, the number of available physical qubits is very limited, and no additional

resources can be allocated to the implementation of error reduction protocols.  To this end,

the  only  viable  option  is  to  use  QEM  techniques  to  reduce  the  noise-induced  bias  in  the

computation.   The  algorithms  that  can  be  implemented  on  this  type  of  devices  typically

involve very shallow circuits, where quantum coherence cannot be significantly degraded by

the external environment.

    In Fig. 1, we observe that the amount of resources available before hitting theF= 0.9

line corresponds to approximately 500 gates and 500 physical qubits.  These numbers imply

that one must optimize the total cost in order to reduce circuit depth, and that each QEM
computation typically consists of the execution of very many different circuits. Consequently,

the most commonly adopted quantum algorithms in this framework are variational which

do not require ancilla qubits.95

    Achieving a practical quantum advantage in this regime appears very unlikely.  Although

the number of qubits might, in principle, allow one to work with wavefunctions beyond the

reach of current state-of-the-art supercomputers, the number of circuit executions required

by these algorithms to compute energies and other molecular observables easily becomes too

large, because it scales asO(||A||                 1/ϵ2), where||A||           1 is the 1-norm of the measured operator  ˆA

andϵis the desired precision.           96 We note that, to mitigate this unfavorable scaling, significant

efforts have been made .97,98


                                                         11
    Sample-based quantum diagonalization methods 99–101 work well in this regime.  In these

approaches, the quantum computer is solely used to sample electronic configurations, which

are then employed to classically solve an eigenvalue problem within a subspace relevant to

the simulated system, but the competition with existing classical methods makes it difficult

to clearly identify a useful quantum advantage .102


Mixed QEM/QED compilation

By increasing the number of gates and/or qubits involved in the computation, the resulting

noise becomes such that the exponential overhead introduced by error mitigation techniques

will render our efforts to extract value from the computation futile.  However, with access to

a sufficient number of qubits we can allocate some of them for implementing error detection

routines on selected operations, while still targeting computationally challenging simulations

for  classical  computers.   Specifically,  in  this  compilation  regime,  we  consider  QPUs  with

around 104 physical qubits and circuits comprising at most 103 gates.  We point to the work

of Ref.  103 that very recently explored the ground state energy simulation of H2 under this

compilation regime.

    In this spirit, algorithms for this regime of compilation still require the execution of many
circuits  per  computation,  but  we  can  now  target  slightly  deeper  circuits.   As  in  previous

settings, the hardware dependent compiler will aim to minimize both the circuit depth and

the number of CNOT gates.  It is important to highlight that in this regime we can now

consider algorithms that have been theoretically proven to satisfy Heisenberg scaling of the

runtimeT=O(ϵ      −1  ),  i.e.   saturating  the  bounds  of  quantum  information.104  This  can  be

accomplished  because  part  of  the  denoising  is  carried  out  by  classical  subroutines. 105–110

However,  the  success  of  this  extraction  remains  strongly  dependent  on  the  level  of  noise

present in the quantum data.  Hence, the most appropriate algorithm of this kind for this

regime are likely single-ancilla phase estimation algorithms. 111  The key idea behind these

methods is to decompose the quantum algorithm, such as the quantum phase estimation 48


                                                        12
for energy measurements, into smaller circuits, each responsible for independently sampling

a  point  of  the  molecular  autocorrelation  function.   Based  on  these  samples,  an  external

classical subroutine extracts the frequencies of interest.  This approach can also be extended

to the extraction of general molecular observables. 112 We point out that these algoritms, at

least considered in their abstract formulation, could be competitive choices with respect to

standard QPE, even when compiled into machines with a greater number of physical qubits.

    Due to the limitations on circuit depth, the quantum simulation routines best suited for

this compilation regime are those based on low-order Trotter formulas, which have recently

benefited  from  several  advancements.113–116  The  advantages  of  developing  resource-aware

algorithms were recently demonstrated by Toshioet al.,                 117 who proposed a framework that

incorporates most of the features discussed in this section.  Their comprehensive protocol
estimates selected eigenvalues of an 8×8-site Hubbard model (whose exact solution is cur-

rently beyond classical computational capabilities) with an estimated serial execution time

of  approximately  10  days.   Other  notable  contributions  in  this  direction  are  described  in

Refs.  118,119.


Mixed QED/QEC compilation

When approaching the threshold of 105 physical qubits, we can envisage a mixed compilation

regime in which the error correction gadgeting procedure is applied only to a subset of the

operations, while error detection protocols are implemented for the remainder.  Due to the

computational overhead required by T-gate factories, in this regime the compilation is aimed

not at reducing the circuit depth but at minimizing the T-gate count; see Ref.  120 for an

example.  In the same spirit, we highlight the very recent work of DalFavero and LaRose 121

who investigated the interplay of QEM and QEC compilation.

    Considering  that  only  a  moderate  number  of  gates  can  be  error  corrected,  alternative

strategies to reduce the qubit overhead such as QEM-based magic state factories could also

be beneficial .122 Finally, from a more algorithmic perspective, it is known that QPE-like ap-


                                                        13
proaches rely on a high overlap between the input state and the target states 123,124 to reduce

the total number of circuit executions.  In the same spirit, strategies based on transversal

gates-only circuits for preparing high-overlap initial states are a promising direction to reduce

costs, even when QEC is only partially done .125,126


Full QEC compilation

All computational tasks requiring more than 105  gates are likely to be addressed only by

fully quantum error-corrected (QEC) machines.  Algorithms designed for these machines to

achieve utility-scale computation must fulfill several requirements:  (i) algorithmic primitives

(such as standard linear algebra operations) are efficiently compatible with native gates and

their corresponding QEC gadgetization, (ii) robustness to poor initial state preparation, and

(iii) high parallelizability.

    It  is  also  important  to  note  that,  at  this  level,  quantum  simulations  should  focus  on

those algorithms offering the best asymptotic scaling (with respect to system size) in terms

of T-gates.  For this reason, the quantum simulation routines, which will have the greatest

impact  these  machines  become  available,  are  those  based  on  quantum  signal  processing

techniques127,128 or on decompositions of the time-evolution operator as a linear combination
of  unitaries.129  Currently,  substantial  effort130,131  in  this  field  is  devoted  to  reducing  the

computational cost of these routines, which heavily rely on block-encoding subroutines 29,132

required to implement non-unitary operations.


Conclusions on compilation regimes

We  emphasize  that,  to  date,  no  clear  demonstration  of  a  useful  quantum  advantage  has
been  achieved  yet.   The  complexity  of  the  quantum  stack  we  have  presented  is  reflected

in a continuum of possible compilation strategies, which we have categorized into four dis-

tinct regimes.  The key message is that adopting a hardware-dependent algorithmic design

perspective can lead to practical utility for quantum computing in chemistry without neces-


                                                        14
sarily requiring hardware specifications that match the full QEC regime.  In particular, the

hardware-algorithm  co-design  discussed  above  could  provide  a  practical  demonstration  of

the advantage of quantum algorithms over classical methods in routine calculations within

a regime corresponding to the mixed QED/QEC compilation (i.e.  with≈500−1000 logical

qubits).

    To understand why this type of compilation could be advantageous, we consider a circuit

in which the probability of an error occurring in each operation isp   gate.  It can be shown that

the sampling overhead of QEM/QED required for circuits with this type of noise is modest

(compared to the exponential overhead arising for arbitrary circuit depth) provided that the

circuit size is of orderp   −1gate.133,134 In this case, the idea of the mixed compilation paradigm is

that QEC protocols do not necessarily need to reduce logical error rates to the level of the
standard floating-point errors of classical computersϵ≈10     −16  , but rather to achieve only

partial error correction such thatp         pcgate <ϵ, with (p    pcgate)−1 ≈G, whereGdenotes the size of the

circuit to be executed.  Very recently, similar circuit size estimates for utility scale quantum

computation have been made exploring the impact of a QEM/QEC compilation . 135,136


3  Target Applications in Molecular and Materials Sci-

       ence

Quantum computers are expensive to develop and so there must be some way to create signif-

icant benefits to make up for the investments.  Considering electronic structure simulations,

the question is therefore where traditional computational quantum chemistry and materials

science is currently employed to advance knowledge and make discoveries of potential indus-

trial value.  This is the case for understanding, design, and improvement of materials and

catalytic processes, and potentially of pharmacological events.  With this in mind, a main

task driving the quantum computing community working on electronic structure has been

the identification of target systems to demonstrate a quantum advantage.


                                                       15
    AnN-electron wavefunction expressed in a basis set ofMspin-orbitals lives in a                  N-
                                                                                                                M
dimensional Hilbert space, but what eventually matters is how many electronic configurations

actually contribute to the accurate description of a system. To understand this problem, well-

established categorization schemes for the electronic structures of molecules and materials in

terms of electron correlation can be utilized .137 Standard categorization schemes are based on

the number of electronic configurations with large amplitude in theN-electron wavefunction

and  the  number  of  orbitals  to  be  included  in  the  calculation.   Accordingly,  one  splits  the

total electronic correlation problem into static and dynamic correlation . 138–142

    The separation of the total electron correlation problem into static and dynamic corre-

lation implies two subsets of orbitals (apart from the lower lying core orbitals):  the active

orbital space contains the strongly correlated (’active’) orbitals, whereas the typically much
larger  set  of  weakly  correlated  orbitals  gives  rise  to  the  dynamic  correlation.   The  active

orbitals pose a challenge to traditional electronic structure methods because of the resulting

multi-configurational nature of the electronic wave function.  Exact diagonalization within

the active space followed by the addition of the dynamic correlation through perturbation

theory is the standard procedure to deal with the different types of orbitals (giving rise to

complete active space approaches with subsequent multi-reference perturbation theory).  As

long as future fault-tolerant quantum computers cannot represent electronic states on a few

thousand  logical  qubits,  the  separation  of  the  orbital  space  into  active  orbitals  and  their

complement will be a hardware-imposed necessity (simply because of the limited number of

logical qubits available for state preparation and phase estimation).  Hence, the considera-

tion of dynamic correlation will be a mandatory separate step for quantitative predictions,
which may be accomplished by quantum variants of multi-reference perturbation theory (as

in Refs.  143,144) or by dressing the Hamiltonian in such a way that dynamic correlations

are folded into the Hamiltonian prior to quantum simulation (see, e.g., Refs.  145–147).

    A remaining issue is the identification of the active orbitals, for which concepts of orbital

entanglement 148,149 allow one to accurately discriminate between the two types of electron


                                                         16
correlation.150  Along these lines, we developed 151–153  an automated protocol, the so-called

autoCAS protocol, to determine the relevant active space for the description of a molecule.

This protocol can also be applied to categorize the electronic structure of a given molecule

and to hint at the number of determinants to include in QPE state preparation. 154  In the

categorization scheme introduced in Ref.  154,  molecules placed into class 0 can be quali-

tatively  described  by  a  single  electronic  configuration  and  therefore  feature  only  dynamic

correlations.  By contrast, multi-configurational electronic structures are grouped into two

classes ,154  class 1 and class 2,  where the latter class comprises those cases that require a

large fraction of the full valence orbital space as active space.  Class-2 cases are very hard

to handle on classical computers and therefore considered as ultimate targets for quantum

computation.
    By contrast, class-1 molecules are associated with comparatively small active spaces.  In

chemistry, they represent the majority of the multi-configurational cases (for instance, when

considering transition states in chemical reaction space, mononuclear open-shell transition-

metal complexes, or excited states in visible-light photochemistry).  Accordingly, many well-

established  traditional  multi-reference  approaches  have  been  developed  for  their  quantum

chemical description.  Accordingly, the importance of the weakly correlated class-0 and the

moderately correlated class-1 cases in chemistry points to the need for utility scale quantum

computation  run  routinely  for  standard  static  correlation  problems  and  even  for  weakly

correlated molecules.

    Still, we may point to application areas, where typical class-2 molecules can be found.  In

view of the notorious nitrogenase mechanism example,7 it is obvious that the mode of action
of metalloproteins with multi-nuclear transition metal clusters (such as FeFe hydrogenase or

the manganese cluster in photosystem II mentioned in the Introduction) is a source for class-2

examples.  Since these clusters may be understood as fragments of solids,  such as chalco-

genides and oxides, class-2 systems are likely to be found frequently among intermediates of

heterogeneous catalysis.  If we consider a rough surface of a metal, a metal-chalcogenide, a


                                                        17
metal-oxide, or of an alloy, high structure variability and unsaturated valences can produce

strong electron correlation effects for substrate-binding surface atoms. Such situations can be

dealt with by applying projection embedding approaches155–160 to define a sufficiently large

structural model of such a piece of a surface that is then likely to have class-2 character.

    While  ab  initio  predictions  in  general  demand  accurate  calculated  data,  this  becomes

most obvious in the context of microkinetic modelling where energy errors enter rate expres-

sions through an error-amplifying exponential 161  of the rate constant.  In all such applica-

tions,  quantum computation (through phase estimation) is expected to deliver energies of

controllable accuracy in a given orbital space.

    Next, we should put these application cases into the broader perspective of future com-

putational  chemistry  and  materials  science.   We  will  soon  see  a  shift  away  from  DFT  as
the  standard  workhorse  of  computational  campaigns  to  (foundation)  machine-learned  in-

teratomic potentials (MLIPs) 162–166  .  This paradigm shift has significant implications for

quantum computation in molecular and materials science.  Quantum computations will then

serve the purpose of training data production and validation.  Hence, high-quality training

data  obtained  from  QPU-accelerated  calculations  will  allow  for  the  development  of  more

accurate machine learning procedures.

    We may expect future quantum computation to become a true competitor to classical

approaches only if it can be carried out routinely also for weakly correlated problems within

the resource limits set by the best traditional approaches (that is, within the hardware re-

sources and runtimes needed for accurate coupled cluster calculations).  If no active space

needs to be defined (as for class-0 molecules) the benchmark method remains CCSD(T). 33
This is why quantum computational chemistry must compare to the runtime needed to reach

chemical accuracy with CCSD(T). In the spirit of this broader perspective on quantum com-

putation, we point to the work of Chen and Chan 167 who have begun exploring a theoretical

framework for general quantum speedups in quantum chemistry.

    To demonstrate a gain in time and utility for large-scale quantum chemistry simulations,


                                                       18
we can consider two possible strategies.  The first consists of directly comparing the time

required by the two methods, CCSD(T) and QPE-type approaches, to obtain a result with an

error equal toϵrelative to the exact energy in a given orbital basis set.  The second is a more

theoretical approach, in which we may estimate the speedup Λ by calculating the ratio of     εQPE(N)

the error bounds for the two methods as a function of the orbital space Λ =O                          εCCSD(T)(N)    ,

for a fixed amount of computational resources (classical and quantum).

    Considering the first approach, however, we currently cannot perform QPE calculations

and  directly  measure  the  elapsed  time.   The  predominant  approach  in  the  literature  has

therefore been making assumptions about the specifications of the available hardware,  its

architecture, and the error-correction protocol aiming to identify the hardware specifications

required to guarantee a quantum speedup.168,169 Although this introduces a certain degree
of arbitrariness in the estimation of the elapsed time, it nevertheless allows for comparisons

of computational costs that would otherwise be inaccessible.

    Considering  the  potential  roadblocks  that  different  platforms  may  encounter  in  their

scalability over the coming years (see Sec. 2), it appears likely that early quantum computer

prototypes  will  offer  greater  availability  of  logical  qubits  rather  than  large  circuit  depths.

Therefore,  detailed  studies  of  runtime  estimates  for  quantum  algorithms  based  on  single

ancillas are a priority at present as such algorithms are naturally embarrassingly parallel.

Moreover,  by construction,  they require shallower circuits and reduced connectivity,  since

they  perform  conditional  evolutions  on  only  one  qubit  at  a  time.   Assuming  a  quantum

computer  in  which  the  width  (i.e.,  the  number  of  logical  qubits)  is  not  a  computational

bottleneck, but the depth (i.e., the number of logical operations) is, this allows us to also
mitigate the issue of clock speed in future quantum processors.  Such processors are likely

to  operate  very  slowly  in  their  early  stages,  in  view  of  current  error-correction  protocols

and  the  challenges  associated  with  real-time  calibration.   However,  such  an  approach  will

also be more architecture-friendly, especially in scenarios where achieving a high qubit count

involves connecting multiple QPUs—each containing hundreds or thousands of qubits. 84,170


                                                         19
    If, conversely, we focus on the second approach, it becomes apparent that the primary

limitation is the absence, to date, of rigorous error bounds for coupled-cluster methods that

can be directly compared with those available for QPE-type algorithms.  One of the central

open problems in modern computational chemistry is therefore how to derive rigorously such

estimates, not only for coupled-cluster methods, but also for the full spectrum of techniques

developed over recent decades.47


4  Conclusions


Building a quantum computer is a tremendous challenge.  Deploying scalable,  useful,  and

affordable quantum hardware will be crucial, but its availability will depend on many factors.

A  truly  reliable  and  useful  quantum  machine  would  feature  all-to-all  qubit  connectivity,

low error rates on native operations—low enough to enable quantum error correction with

manageable  overhead—fast  and  accurate  readout,  scalability  without  qubit  degradation,

and relatively low production costs.  Since these features are not likely to be accomplished
altogether in the near future, we must take them as criteria to critically consider quantum

algorithm development.

    In this work,  we therefore elaborated on what a quantum computer should be able to

target  in  order  to  be  useful  for  the  computational  chemistry  practice.   One  goal  must  be

a computational advantage with respect to methods that already provide accurate results

(such  as  CCSD(T))  in  calculations  on  classical  computers.   Next,  it  must  be  possible  to

perform such quantum calculations routinely, rather than targeting single highlight results

for very difficult problems.

    In essence, we should aim not only at the celebratedchemical  accuracyin single-point

calculations, but also keep in mind the intricacies ofchemical complexityin reactive and/or

functional molecular systems comprising numerous molecular transformation steps.  Quan-
tum computation will deliver only part of the results needed.  Therefore, it will be necessary



                                                       20
to  integrate,  at  least  partially,  certain  calculations  offloaded  to  a  quantum  computer  into

existing software.  Achieving this will require all quantum algorithms (also those for the cal-

culation of molecular properties and forces) to mature to the level we are now approaching in

single-point quantum energy evaluations.  Work along these lines has already begun. 171–177

Still,  too  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  algorithm  development  beyond  (ground  state)

energies.

    Beyond  the  scope  of  quantum  chemistry,  quantum  variational  algorithms  for  machine

learning  require  numerous  high-quality  circuit  evaluations  to  estimate  gradients  via  sam-

pling.  Improving the gate operation speed in quantum computers would reduce algorithmic

overhead, potentially extending potential quantum advantages to a broader range of problem

sizes and instances—–not only in the asymptotic regime.
    We conclude this analysis by pondering the development and operational cost of a quan-

tum computer.  Recent advances in real-time Field-Programmable Gate Array based error

decoding routines178 reinforce the emerging paradigm of quantum computing integrated with

existing classical high-performance computing (HPC) centers. 179,180 With current quantum

hardware technology, quantum HPC centers will differ substantially from present-day clas-

sical  facilities,  particularly  because  the  energy  required  for  cooling  quantum  processors  is

expected to exceed the energy required for the computation itself, with cooling loads being

highly sensitive to the computational architecture. 181

    A comprehensive assessment of the energy and economic cost of a quantum computer

must account for four intertwined components.  First, the logical cost concerns the algorith-

mic resources necessary to perform quantum computations.  As thoroughly discussed in Ref.
182, larger entanglement resources favor quantum computation over classical computation.

This is at the basis of a study 183 that estimated a five orders of magnitude energy gain over

classical computation in Google’s quantum advantage landmark experiment. 184 Nonetheless,

accounting only for this energy cost would be a too simplistic approach.  Such quantum ma-

chines incur an operational cost that encompasses the physical and thermodynamic resources


                                                        21
required to run the processor.185

    At this level, quantum thermodynamics186  becomes central since maintaining quantum

coherence  requires  continuous  entropy  reduction,  making  the  external  control  (i.e.,  qubit

manipulation,  physical  interconnection,  isolation  systems,  and  readout  infrastructure)  en-

ergetically  demanding.   Hence,  a  strong  emphasis  must  be  put  on  improved  refrigeration

technologies, efficient error decoding, and optimized quantum control schemes.  Increasing

noise resilience requires additional algorithmic resources, such as larger and more efficient

quantum  error  correction  schemes,  which  in  turn  demand  more  physical  qubits  and  more

sophisticated classical control systems, thereby increasing classical energy consumption and

hardware overhead.  Third, we cannot neglect production costs including fabrication com-

plexity,  supply  chains,  and  the  use  of  critical  raw  materials  necessary  to  build  scalable
quantum hardware.  Moreover, end-of-life management raises questions concerning disposal

and  recyclability  of  cryogenic  components,  superconducting  materials,  rare  elements,  and

electronic subsystems.187

    Accordingly, no definitive quantitative answer exists regarding the full cost of quantum

computing infrastructures and their potential energy advantage.  Yet, we need to take into

account  the  above  constraints  in  a  holistic  framework  to  evaluate  the  long-term  edge  of

quantum technologies, and ultimately, quantum computation at utility scale.


5  Author information


Corresponding Author

    Markus Reiher - ORCID: 0000-0002-9508-1565 ;

    Email:  markus.reiher@phys.chem.ethz.ch

    Authors

    Davide Castaldo - ORCID: 0000-0001-8622-175X
    Author Contributions



                                                       22
Both authors contributed to conceptualize the work,  summarize the literature,  design the

figures and write the paper.  Moreover both authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.


Acknowledgement

The  authors  acknowledge  financial  support  from  the  Swiss  National  Science  Foundation

through Grant No. 200021         219616 and through Grant No. 233975 (SPEED-Q Swiss National

Postdoctoral Fellowship) and from the Novo Nordisk Foundation (Grant No. NNF20OC0059939

’Quantum for Life’).


References


  (1)Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P.; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P.; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum

       machine learning.Nature2017,549, 195–202.

  (2)McArdle, S.; Endo, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Benjamin, S. C.; Yuan, X. Quantum com-

       putational chemistry.Rev. Mod. Phys.2020,92, 015003.

  (3)Bayerstadler,  A.;  Becquin,  G.;  Binder,  J.;  Botter,  T.;  Ehm,  H.;  Ehmer,  T.;  Erd-

       mann, M.; Gaus, N.; Harbach, P.; Hess, M.; Klesch, J.; Leib, M.; Luber, S.; Luckow, A.;

       Manksy,  M.;  Mauerer,  W.;  Neukart,  F.;  Niedermeier,  C.;  Palacka,  L.;  Pfeiffer,  R.;
       Polenz, C.;  Sepulveda, J.;  Sievers, T.;  Standen, B.;  Streif, M.;  Strohm, T.;  Utschig-

       Utschig, C.; Volz, D. Industry quantum computing applications.EPJ Quantum Tech-

       nology2021,8, 25.

  (4)Portmann, C.; Renner, R. Security in quantum cryptography.Rev. Mod. Phys.2022,

       94, 025008.

  (5)Herman, D.; Googin, C.; Liu, X.; Sun, Y.; Galda, A.; Safro, I.; Pistoia, M.; Alexeev, Y.

       Quantum computing for finance.Nat. Rev. Phys.2023,5, 450–465.


                                                      23
 (6)Baiardi, A.;  Christandl, M.;  Reiher, M. Quantum computing for molecular biology.

      ChemBioChem2023,24, e202300120.

 (7)Reiher,  M.;  Wiebe,  N.;  Svore,  K.  M.;  Wecker,  D.;  Troyer,  M.  Elucidating  reaction

      mechanisms on quantum computers.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.2017,114, 7555–

      7560.

 (8)Goings,  J.  J.;  White,  A.;  Lee,  J.;  Tautermann,  C.  S.;  Degroote,  M.;  Gidney,  C.;

      Shiozaki, T.; Babbush, R.; Rubin, N. C. Reliably assessing the electronic structure of

      cytochrome P450 on today’s classical computers and tomorrow’s quantum computers.

      Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A2022,119, e2203533119.

 (9)Hoefler, T.; H¨aner, T.; Troyer, M. Disentangling hype from practicality:  On realisti-
      cally achieving quantum advantage.CACM2023,66, 82–87.

(10)Alexeev,  Y.;  Batista,  V.  S.;  Bauman,  N.;  Bertels,  L.;  Claudino,  D.;  Dutta,  R.;

      Gagliardi,  L.;  Godwin,  S.;  Govind,  N.;  Head-Gordon,  M.,  et  al.  A  perspective  on

      quantum computing applications in quantum chemistry using 25–100 logical qubits.

      Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation2025,21, 11335–11357.

(11)Eisert, J.; Preskill, J. Mind the gaps:  The fraught road to quantum advantage.arXiv

      preprint arXiv:2510.199282025,

(12)Babbush,  R.;  King,  R.;  Boixo,  S.;  Huggins,  W.;  Khattar,  T.;  Low,  G.  H.;  Mc-

      Clean, J. R.; O’Brien, T.; Rubin, N. C. The grand challenge of quantum applications.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.091242025,

(13)Hastings, M. Quasi-adiabatic continuation in gapped spin and fermion systems: Gold-

      stone’s theorem andflux periodicity.J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp.2007,2007, P05010.

(14)Eisert,  J.;  Cramer,  M.;  Plenio,  M.  B.  Colloquium:  Area  laws  for  the  entanglement

      entropy.Rev. Mod. Phys.2010,82, 277–306.


                                                      24
(15)Einsle, O.; Rees, D. C. Structural enzymology of nitrogenase enzymes.Chemical re-

      views2020,120, 4969–5004.

(16)Jasniewski,  A.  J.;  Lee,  C.  C.;  Ribbe,  M.  W.;  Hu,  Y.  Reactivity,  mechanism,  and

      assembly of the alternative nitrogenases.Chemical Reviews2020,120, 5107–5157.

(17)Qing, G.; Ghazfar, R.; Jackowski, S. T.; Habibzadeh, F.; Ashtiani, M. M.; Chen, C.-P.;

      Smith III, M. R.; Hamann, T. W. Recent advances and challenges of electrocatalytic

      N2 reduction to ammonia.Chemical reviews2020,120, 5437–5516.

(18)Cox,  N.;  Pantazis,  D.  A.;  Lubitz,  W.  Current  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of

      water oxidation in photosystem II and its relation to XFEL data.Ann. Rev. Biochem.

      2020,89, 795–820.

(19)Greife, P.; Sch¨onborn, M.; Capone, M.; Assun¸c˜ao, R.; Narzi, D.; Guidoni, L.; Dau, H.

      The electron–proton bottleneck of photosynthetic oxygen evolution.Nature2023,617,

      623–628.

(20)Bhowmick,  A.;  Hussein,  R.;  Bogacz,  I.;  Simon,  P.  S.;  Ibrahim,  M.;  Chatterjee,  R.;

      Doyle,  M.  D.;  Cheah,  M.  H.;  Fransson,  T.;  Chernev,  P.;  Kim,  I.-S.;  Makita,  H.;

      Dasgupta,  M.;  Kaminsky,  C.  J.;  Zhang,  M.;  G¨atcke,  J.;  Haupt,  S.;  Nangca,  I.  I.;

      Keable,  S.  M.;  Aydin,  A.  O.;  Tono,  K.;  Owada,  S.;  Gee,  L.  B.;  Fuller,  F.  D.;

      Batyuk, A.; Alonso-Mori, R.; Holton, J. M.; Paley, D. W.; Moriarty, N. W.; Mame-

      dov, F.;  Adams, P. D.;  Brewster, A. S.;  Dobbek, H.;  Sauter, N. K.;  Bergmann, U.;

      Zouni, A.; Messinger, J.; Kern, J.; Yano, J.; Yachandra, V. K. Structural evidence for
      intermediates during O2 formation in photosystem II.Nature2023,617, 629–636.

(21)Fontecilla-Camps,  J.  C.;  Volbeda,  A.;  Cavazza,  C.;  Nicolet,  Y.  Structure/function

      relationships of [NiFe]-and [FeFe]-hydrogenases.Chem. Rev.2007,107, 4273–4303.

(22)Vogiatzis, K. D.; Polynski, M. V.; Kirkland, J. K.; Townsend, J.; Hashemi, A.; Liu, C.;


                                                       25
      Pidko, E. A. Computational approach to molecular catalysis by 3d transition metals:

      challenges and opportunities.Chemical reviews2018,119, 2453–2523.

(23)Trncik,  C.;  Detemple,  F.;  Einsle,  O.  Iron-only  Fe-nitrogenase  underscores  common

      catalytic principles in biological nitrogen fixation.Nature Catalysis2023,6, 415–424.

(24)Runda, M. E.; de Kok, N. A.; Schmidt, S. Rieske Oxygenases and Other Ferredoxin-

      Dependent Enzymes:  Electron Transfer Principles and Catalytic Capabilities.Chem-

      BioChem2023,24, e202300078.

(25)Liu, J.; Tian, J.; Perry, C.; Lukowski, A. L.; Doukov, T. I.; Narayan, A. R.; Bridwell-

      Rabb,  J.  Design  principles  for  site-selective  hydroxylation  by  a  Rieske  oxygenase.

      Nature Communications2022,13, 255.

(26)Steiner,  M.;  Reiher,  M.  Autonomous  reaction  network  exploration  in  homogeneous

      and heterogeneous catalysis.Topics in Catalysis2022,65, 6–39.

(27)Shor,  P.  W.  Polynomial-time  algorithms  for  prime  factorization  and  discrete  loga-

      rithms on a quantum computer.SIAM review1999,41, 303–332.

(28)Childs, A. M.; Cleve, R.; Deotto, E.; Farhi, E.; Gutmann, S.; Spielman, D. A. Expo-

      nential algorithmic speedup by a quantum walk. STOC ’03. 2003; pp 59–68.

(29)Gily´en,  A.;  Su,  Y.;  Low,  G.  H.;  Wiebe,  N.  Quantum  singular  value  transformation

      and beyond:  exponential improvements for quantum matrix arithmetics. Proc. Annu.

      ACM Symp. Theory Comput. 2019; pp 193–204.

(30)Babbush,  R.;  Berry,  D.  W.;  Kothari,  R.;  Somma,  R.  D.;  Wiebe,  N.  Exponential

      quantum speedup in simulating coupled classical oscillators.Phys. Rev. X2023,13,

      041041.

(31)von  Burg,  V.;  Low,  G.  H.;  H¨aner,  T.;  Steiger,  D.  S.;  Reiher,  M.;  Roetteler,  M.;



                                                       26
      Troyer, M. Quantum computing enhanced computational catalysis.Phys.  Rev.  Res.

      2021,3, 033055.

(32)Capone, M.; Romanelli, M.; Castaldo, D.; Parolin, G.; Bello, A.; Gil, G.; Vanzan, M.

      A vision for the future of multiscale modeling.ACS Phys. Chem. Au2024,4, 202–225.

(33)Raghavachari, K.;  Trucks, G. W.;  Pople, J. A.;  Head-Gordon, M. A fifth-order per-

      turbation comparison of electron correlation theories.Chem.  Phys.  Lett.1989,157,

      479–483.

(34)Bartlett, R. J.; Musia l, M. Coupled-cluster theory in quantum chemistry.Rev. Mod.

      Phys.2007,79, 291–352.

(35)Bartlett, R. J. Perspective on Coupled-cluster Theory. The evolution toward simplicity

      in quantum chemistry.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.2024,26, 8013–8037.

(36)Jensen, F.Introduction to computational chemistry; John wiley & sons, 2017.

(37)Koch,  W.;  Holthausen,  M.  C.A  chemist’s  guide  to  density  functional  theory;  John

      Wiley & Sons, 2015.

(38)Reiher, M. Theoretical study of the Fe (phen) 2 (NCS) 2 spin-crossover complex with

      reparametrized density functionals.Inorganic chemistry2002,41, 6928–6935.

(39)Dreuw, A.; Head-Gordon, M. Failure of time-dependent density functional theory for

      long-range charge-transfer excited states:  the zincbacteriochlorin- bacteriochlorin and

      bacteriochlorophyll- spheroidene complexes.J. Am. Chem. Soc.2004,126, 4007–4016.

(40)Plata,  R.  E.;  Singleton,  D.  A.  A  case  study  of  the  mechanism  of  alcohol-mediated

      Morita Baylis–Hillman reactions. The importance of experimental observations.Jour-

      nal of the American Chemical Society2015,137, 3811–3826.

(41)Cao, L.; Ryde, U. Extremely large differences in DFT energies for nitrogenase models.

      Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics2019,21, 2480–2488.

                                                      27
(42)Kirklin, S.; Saal, J. E.; Meredig, B.; Thompson, A.; Doak, J. W.; Aykol, M.; R¨uhl, S.;

      Wolverton, C. The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing the accu-

      racy of DFT formation energies.npj Comp. Mat.2015,1, 1–15.

(43)Mardirossian, N.; Head-Gordon, M. Thirty years of density functional theory in com-

      putational chemistry: an overview and extensive assessment of 200 density functionals.

      Molecular physics2017,115, 2315–2372.

(44)Bursch, M.; Mewes, J.-M.; Hansen, A.; Grimme, S. Best-practice DFT protocols for

      basic molecular computational chemistry.Angewandte Chemie2022,134, e202205735.

(45)Motta, M.; Ceperley, D. M.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Gomez, J. A.; Gull, E.; Guo, S.; Jim´enez-

      Hoyos,  C.  A.;  Lan,  T.  N.;  Li,  J.;  Ma,  F.;  Millis,  A.  J.;  Prokof’ev,  N.  V.;  Ray,  U.;
      Scuseria, G. E.; Sorella, S.; Stoudenmire, E. M.; Sun, Q.; Tupitsyn, I. S.; White, S. R.;

      Zgid,  D.;  Zhang,  S.  Towards  the  Solution  of  the  Many-Electron  Problem  in  Real

      Materials:   Equation  of  State  of  the  Hydrogen  Chain  with  State-of-the-Art  Many-

      Body Methods.Phys. Rev. X2017,7, 031059.

(46)Wu,  D.;   Rossi,  R.;   Vicentini,  F.;   Astrakhantsev,  N.;   Becca,  F.;   Cao,  X.;   Car-

      rasquilla,  J.;  Ferrari,  F.;  Georges,  A.;  Hibat-Allah,  M.;  Imada,  M.;  Lauchli,  A.  M.;

      Mazzola, G.; Mezzacapo, A.; Millis, A.; Robledo Moreno, J.; Neupert, T.; Nomura, Y.;

      Nys, J.; Parcollet, O.; Pohle, R.; Romero, I.; Schmid, M.; Silvester, M. J.; Sorella, S.;

      Tocchio, L. F.; Wang, L.; White, S. R.; Wietek, A.; Yang, Q.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, S.;

      Carleo, G. Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems.Science2024,
      386, 296–301.

(47)Reiher, M. Molecule-Specific Uncertainty Quantification in Quantum Chemical Stud-

      ies.Isr. J. Chem.2022,62, e202100101.

(48)Nielsen, M. A.; Chuang, I. L.Quantum computation and quantum information; Cam-

      bridge university press, 2010.

                                                       28
(49)Masson-Delmotte,  V.;  Zhai,  P.;  Pirani,  A.;  Connors,  S.  L.;  P´ean,  C.;  Berger,  S.;

      Caud,  N.;  Chen,  Y.;  Goldfarb,  L.;  Gomis,  M.  Climate  change  2021:   the  physical

      science  basis.Contribution  of  working  group  I  to  the  sixth  assessment  report  of  the

      intergovernmental panel on climate change2021,2, 2391.

(50)Richardson, K.; Steffen, W.; Lucht, W.; Bendtsen, J.; Cornell, S. E.; Donges, J. F.;

      Dr¨uke, M.;  Fetzer, I.;  Bala, G.;  Von Bloh, W.;  Feulner, G.;  Fiedler, S.;  Gerten, D.;

      Gleeson, T.; Hofmann, M.; Huiskamp, W.; Kummu, M.; Mohan, C.; Nogues-Bravo, D.;

      Petri, S.; Rahmstorf, S.; Schaphoff, S.; Thonicke, K.; Tobian, A.; Wang-Erlandsson, L.;

      Weber, L.;  Rockstrom, J. Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries.Sci.  Adv.

      2023,9, eadh2458.

(51)Auff`eves, A. Quantum technologies need a quantum energy initiative.PRX Quantum

      2022,3, 020101.

(52)Brooks,  M.  The  race  to  find  quantum  computing’s  sweet  spot.Nature2023, 617,

      S1–S3.

(53)Appel, A. W.Modern  compiler  implementation  in  ML; Cambridge university press,

      1998.

(54)Monroe, C.; Meekhof, D. M.; King, B. E.; Itano, W. M.; Wineland, D. J. Demonstra-

      tion of a fundamental quantum logic gate.Phys. Rev. Lett.1995,75, 4714.

(55)Beverland, M. E.; Murali, P.; Troyer, M.; Svore, K. M.; Hoefler, T.; Kliuchnikov, V.;
      Low, G. H.; Soeken, M.; Sundaram, A.; Vaschillo, A. Assessing requirements to scale

      to practical quantum advantage.arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.076292022,

(56)De  Leon,  N.  P.;  Itoh,  K.  M.;  Kim,  D.;  Mehta,  K.  K.;  Northup,  T.  E.;  Paik,  H.;

      Palmer, B.; Samarth, N.; Sangtawesin, S.; Steuerman, D. W. Materials challenges and

      opportunities for quantum computing hardware.Science2021,372, eabb2823.


                                                       29
(57)Microsoft Quantum, Roadmap to fault tolerant quantum computation using topolog-

      ical qubit arrays.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.122522025,

(58)Bravyi,  S.;  Dial,  O.;  Gambetta,  J.  M.;  Gil,  D.;  Nazario,  Z.  The  future  of  quantum

      computing with superconducting qubits.J. Appl. Phys.2022,132.

(59)Lekitsch,  B.;  Weidt,  S.;  Fowler,  A.  G.;  Mølmer,  K.;  Devitt,  S.  J.;  Wunderlich,  C.;

      Hensinger,  W.  K.  Blueprint  for  a  microwave  trapped  ion  quantum  computer.Sci.

      Adv.2017,3, e1601540.

(60)Scholl, P.; Schuler, M.; Williams, H. J.; Eberharter, A. A.; Barredo, D.; Schymik, K.-

      N.; Lienhard, V.; Henry, L.-P.; Lang, T. C.; Lahaye, T.; Lauchli, A. M.; Browaeys, A.

      Quantum simulation of 2D antiferromagnets with hundreds of Rydberg atoms.Nature
      2021,595, 233–238.

(61)Bluvstein, D.; Evered, S. J.; Geim, A. A.; Li, S. H.; Zhou, H.; Manovitz, T.; Ebadi, S.;

      Cain,  M.;   Kalinowski,  M.;   Hangleiter,  D.;   Ataides  Bonilla,  P.  J.;   Maskara,  N.;

      Cong, I.; Gao, X.; Rodriguez Sales, P.; Karolyshyn, T.; Semeghini, G.; Gullans, M. J.;

      Greiner, M.; Vuletic, V.; Lukin, M. D. Logical quantum processor based on reconfig-

      urable atom arrays.Nature2024,626, 58–65.

(62)Renger, M.; Verjauw, J.; Wurz, N.; Hosseinkhani, A.; Ockeloen-Korppi, C.; Liu, W.;

      Rath,  A.;   Thapa,  M.  J.;   Vigneau,  F.;   Wybo,  E.;   Bergholm,  V.;   Chan,  C.  F.;

      Csat´ari,  B.;  Dahl,  S.;  Davletkaliyev,  R.;  Giri,  R.;  Gusenkova,  D.;  Heimonen,  H.;

      Hiltunen,  T.;  Hsu,  H.;  Hyypp¨a,  E.;  Ikonen,  J.;  Jones,  T.;  Khalid,  S.;  Kim,  S.-G.;
      Koistinen, M.;  Komlev, A.;  Kotilahti, J.;  Kukushkin, V.;  Lamprich, J.;  Landra, A.;

      Lee,  L.-H.;  Li,  T.;  Liebermann,  P.;  Majumder,  S.;  M¨antyl¨a,  J.;  Marxer,  F.;  Mei-

      jer  van  de  Griend,  A.;  Milchakov,  V.;  Mro˙zek,  J.;  Nath,  J.;  Orell,  T.;  Papiˇc,  M.;

      Partanen,  M.;  Plyushch,  A.;  Pogorzalek,  S.;  Ritvas,  J.;  Romero,  P.  F.;  Sampo,  V.;

      Sepp¨al¨a, M.; Selinmaa, V.; Sundstr¨om, L.; Takmakov, I.; Tarasinski, B.; Tuorila, J.;


                                                        30
      Tyrkk¨o, O.; V¨alimaa, A.; Wesdorp, J.; Yang, P.; Yu, L.; Heinsoo, J.; Veps¨al¨ainen, A.;

      Kindel, W.; Ku, H.-S.; Deppe, F. A Superconducting Qubit-Resonator Quantum Pro-

      cessor with Effective All-to-All Connectivity.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.109032025,

(63)Vigneau,  F.;  Majumder,  S.;  Rath,  A.;  Parrado-Rodr´ıguez,  P.;  Pereira,  F.  R.  F.;

      Pogorzalek,  S.;  Jones,  T.;  Wurz,  N.;  Renger,  M.;  Verjauw,  J.;  Yang,  P.;  Ku,  H.-S.;

      Kindel, W.; Deppe, F.; Heinsoo, J. Quantum error detection in qubit-resonator star

      architecture.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.128692025,

(64)Bourassa,  J.  E.;   Alexander,  R.  N.;   Vasmer,  M.;   Patil,  A.;   Tzitrin,  I.;   Mat-

      suura,  T.;  Su,  D.;  Baragiola,  B.  Q.;  Guha,  S.;  Dauphinais,  G.;  Sabapathy,  K.  K.;

      Menicucci, N. C.; Dhand, I. Blueprint for a scalable photonic fault-tolerant quantum
      computer.Quantum2021,5, 392.

(65)Bartolucci, S.; Birchall, P.; Bombin, H.; Cable, H.; Dawson, C.; Gimeno-Segovia, M.;

      Johnston, E.; Kieling, K.; Nickerson, N.; Pant, M.; Pastawski, F.; Rudolph, T.; Spar-

      row, C. Fusion-based quantum computation.Nat. Comm.2023,14, 912.

(66)Lidar, D. A.; Brun, T. A.Quantum error correction; Cambridge university press, 2013.

(67)Dreier,  F.;  Fleckenstein,  C.;  Aigner,  G.;  Fellner,  M.;  Stahn,  R.;  Lanthaler,  M.;

      Lechner,  W.  Connectivity-aware  Synthesis  of  Quantum  Algorithms.arXiv  preprint

      arXiv:2501.140202025,

(68)Bausch, J.; Senior, A. W.; Heras, F. J.; Edlich, T.; Davies, A.; Newman, M.; Jones, C.;
      Satzinger, K.; Niu, M. Y.; Blackwell, S.; Holland, G.; Kafri, D.; Atalaya, J.; Gidney, C.;

      Hassabis, D.; Boixo, S.; Neven, H.; Kohli, P. Learning high-accuracy error decoding

      for quantum processors.Nature2024, 1–7.

(69)Piveteau, C.; Chubb, C. T.; Renes, J. M. Tensor-network decoding beyond 2d.PRX

      Quantum2024,5, 040303.


                                                       31
(70)Higgott, O.;  Gidney, C. Sparse blossom:  correcting a million errors per core second

      with minimum-weight matching.Quantum2025,9, 1600.

(71)Eastin,  B.;  Knill,  E.  Restrictions  on  transversal  encoded  quantum  gate  sets.Phys.

      Rev. Lett.2009,102, 110502.

(72)Fowler, A. G.; Mariantoni, M.; Martinis, J. M.; Cleland, A. N. Surface codes: Towards

      practical large-scale quantum computation.Phys. Rev. A2012,86, 032324.

(73)Li, Y. A magic state’s fidelity can be superior to the operations that created it.New

      J. Phys.2015,17, 023037.

(74)Lee, S.-H.; Thomsen, F.; Fazio, N.; Brown, B. J.; Bartlett, S. D. Low-overhead magic
      state distillation with color codes.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.077072024,

(75)Delgado,  A.;   Casares,  P.  A.;   Dos  Reis,  R.;   Zini,  M.  S.;   Campos,  R.;   Cruz-

      Hern´andez,  N.;   Voigt,  A.-C.;   Lowe,  A.;   Jahangiri,  S.;   Martin-Delgado,  M.  A.;

      Mueller, J. E.; Arrazola, J. M. Simulating key properties of lithium-ion batteries with

      a fault-tolerant quantum computer.Phys. Rev. A2022,106, 032428.

(76)Kim,  I.  H.;  Liu,  Y.-H.;  Pallister,  S.;  Pol,  W.;  Roberts,  S.;  Lee,  E.  Fault-tolerant

      resource  estimate  for  quantum  chemical  simulations:  Case  study  on  Li-ion  battery

      electrolyte molecules.Phys. Rev. Res.2022,4, 023019.

(77)Blunt,  N.  S.;   Camps,  J.;   Crawford,  O.;   Izs´ak,  R.;   Leontica,  S.;   Mirani,  A.;

      Moylett, A. E.; Scivier, S. A.; Sunderhauf, C.; Schopf, P.; Taylor, J. M.; Holzmann, N.
      Perspective on the current state-of-the-art of quantum computing for drug discovery

      applications.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2022,18, 7001–7023.

(78)Gidney, C.; Shutty, N.; Jones, C. Magic state cultivation:  growing T states as cheap

      as CNOT gates.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.175952024,




                                                        32
(79)Vaknin,  Y.;  Jacoby,  S.;  Grimsmo,  A.;  Retzker,  A.  Magic  State  Cultivation  on  the

      Surface Code.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.017432025,

(80)Katabarwa, A.; Gratsea, K.; Caesura, A.; Johnson, P. D. Early fault-tolerant quantum

      computing.PRX quantum2024,5, 020101.

(81)Main, D.; Drmota, P.; Nadlinger, D.; Ainley, E.; Agrawal, A.; Nichol, B.; Srinivas, R.;

      Araneda,  G.;  Lucas,  D.  Distributed  quantum  computing  across  an  optical  network

      link.Nature2025, 1–6.

(82)Mordini, C.; Ricci Vasquez, A.; Motohashi, Y.; M¨uller, M.; Malinowski, M.; Zhang, C.;

      Mehta, K. K.;  Kienzler, D.;  Home, J. P. Multizone trapped-ion qubit control in an

      integrated photonics QCCD device.Physical Review X2025,15, 011040.

(83)Mohseni, M.;  Scherer, A.;  Johnson, K. G.;  Wertheim, O.;  Otten, M.;  Aadit, N. A.;

      Alexeev,  Y.;  Bresniker,  K.  M.;  Camsari, K.  Y.;  Chapman,  B.;  Chatterjee,  S.;  Dag-

      new, G. A.; Esposito, A.; Fahim, F.; Fiorentino, M.; Gajjar, A.; Khalid, A.; Kong, X.;

      Kulchytskyy, B.; Kyoseva, E.; Li, R.; Lott, P. A.; Markov, I. L.; McDermott, R. F.;

      Pedretti, G.;  Rao, P.;  Rieffel, E.;  Silva, A.;  Sorebo, J.;  Spentzouris, P.;  Steiner, Z.;

      Torosov, B.; Venturelli, D.; Visser, R. J.; Webb, Z.; Zhan, X.; Cohen, Y.; Ronagh, P.;

      Ho, A.;  Beausoleil, R. G.;  Martinis, J. M. How to build a quantum supercomputer:

      Scaling from hundreds to millions of qubits.arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.104062024,

(84)Aghaee Rad, H.;  Ainsworth, T.;  Alexander, R.;  Altieri, B.;  Askarani, M.;  Baby, R.;

      Banchi,  L.;  Baragiola,  B.;  Bourassa,  J.;  Chadwick,  R.;  Charania,  I.;  Chen,  H.;
      Collins, M. J.;  Contu, P.;  D’Arcy, N.;  Dauphinais, G.;  De Prins, R.;  Deschenes, D.;

      Di Luch, I.;  Duque, S.;  Edke, P.;  Fayer, S. E.;  Ferracin, S.;  Ferretti, H.;  Gefaell, J.;

      Glancy, S.;  Gonz´alez-Arciniegas, C.;  Grainge, T.;  Han, Z.;  Hastrup, J.;  Helt, L. G.;

      Hillmann,  T.;  Hundal,  J.;  Izumi,  S.;  Jaeken,  T.;  Jonas,  M.;  Kocsis,  S.;  Krasnokut-

      ska, I.; Larsen, M. V.; Laskowski, P.; Laudenbach, F.; Lavoie, J.; Li, M.; Lomonte, E.;


                                                        33
      Lopetegui,  C.  E.;  Luey,  B.;  Lund,  A.  P.;  Ma,  C.;  Madsen,  L.  S.;  Mahler,  D.  H.;

      Mantilla  Calder´on,  L.;  Menotti,  M.;  Miatto,  F.  M.;  Morrison,  B.;  Nadkarni,  P.  J.;

      Nakamura, T.; Neuhaus, L.; Niu, Z.; Noro, R.; Papirov, K.; Pesah, A.; Phillips, D. S.;

      Plick,  W.  N.;  Rogalsky,  T.;  Rortais,  F.;  Sabines-Chesterking,  J.;  Safavi-Bayat,  S.;

      Sazhaev,  E.;   Seymour,  M.;   Rezaei  Shad,  K.;   Silverman,  M.;   Srinivasan,  S.  A.;

      Stephan, M.;  Tang, Q. Y.;  Tasker, J. F.;  Teo, Y. S.;  Then, R. B.;  Tremblay, J. E.;

      Tzitrin, I.;  Vaidya, V. D.;  Vasmer, M.;  Vernon, Z.;  Villalobos, L. F. S. S. M.;  Wal-

      she, B. W.; Weil, R.; Xin, X.; Yan, X.; Yao, Y.; Zamani Abnili, M.; Zhang, Y. Scaling

      and networking a modular photonic quantum computer.Nature2025, 1–8.

(85)PsiQuantum Team.,  A  manufacturable  platform  for  photonic  quantum  computing.

      Nature2025,641, 876–883.

(86)Aharonov, D.; Ben-Or, M. Fault-tolerant quantum computation with constant error.

      Proc. Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput. 1997; pp 176–188.

(87)Knill, E.; Laflamme, R.; Zurek, W. H. Resilient quantum computation.Science1998,

      279, 342–345.

(88)Eickbusch, A.; McEwen, M.; Sivak, V.; Bourassa, A.; Atalaya, J.; Claes, J.; Kafri, D.;

      Gidney,  C.;  Warren,  C.  W.;  Gross,  J.;  Opremcak,  A.;  Zobrist,  N.;  Miao,  K.  C.;

      Roberts, G.; Satzinger, K. J.; Bengtsson, A.; Neeley, M.; Livingston, W. P.; Greene, A.;

      Acharya, R.; Aghababaie Beni, L.; Aigeldinger, G.; Alcaraz, R.; Andersen, T. I.; Ans-

      mann, M.; Arute, F.; Arya, K.; Asfaw, A.; Babbush, R.; Ballard, B.; Bardin, J. C.;

      Bilmes,  A.;   Bovaird,  J.;   Bowers,  D.;   Brill,  L.;   Broughton,  M.;   Browne,  D.  A.;

      Buchea,  B.;  Buckley,  B.  B.;  Burger,  T.;  Burkett,  B.;  Bushnell,  N.;  Cabrera,  A.;

      Campero,  J.;  Chang,  H.-S.;  Chiaro,  B.;  Chih,  L.-Y.;  Cleland,  A.  Y.;  Cogan,  J.;

      Collins,  R.;  Conner,  P.;  Courtney,  W.;  Crook,  A.  L.;  Curtin,  B.;  Das,  S.;  Del

      Toro Barba, A.; Demura, S.; De Lorenzo, L.; Di Paolo, A.; Donohoe, P.; Drozdov, I. K.;

      Dunsworth, A.; Elbag, A. M.; Elzouka, M.; Erickson, C.; Ferreira, V. S.; Flores Bur-

                                                       34
      gos,  L.;  Forati,  E.;  Fowler,  A.  G.;  Foxen,  B.;  Ganjam,  S.;  Garcia,  G.;  Gasca,  R.;

      Genois,  E.;  Giang,  W.;  Gilboa,  D.;  Gosula,  R.;  Grajales  Dau,  A.;  Graumann,  D.;

      Ha,  T.;  Habegger,  S.;  Hamilton,  M.  C.;  Hansen,  M.;  Harrigan,  M.  P.;  Harring-

      ton, S. D.; Heslin, S.; Heu, P.; Higgott, O.; Hiltermann, R.; Hilton, J.; Huang, H.-Y.;

      Huff, A.; Huggins, W. J.; Jeffrey, E.; Jiang, Z.; Jin, X.; Jones, C.; Joshi, C.; Juhas, P.;

      Kabel,  A.;  Kang,  H.;  Karamlou,  A.  H.;  Kechedzhi,  K.;  Khaire,  T.;  Khattar,  T.;

      Khezri, M.; Kim, S.; Kobrin, B.; Korotkov, A. N.; Kostritsa, F.; Kreikebaum, J. M.;

      Kurilovich,  V.  D.;  Landhuis,  D.;  Lange-Dei,  T.;  Langley,  B.  W.;  Lau,  K.-M.;  Led-

      ford, J.;  Lee, K.;  Lester, B. J.;  Le Guevel, L.;  Li, W. Y.;  Lill, A. T.;  Locharla, A.;

      Lucero,  E.;  Lundahl,  D.;  Lunt,  A.;  Madhuk,  S.;  Maloney,  A.;  Mandr`a,  S.;  Mar-

      tin, L. S.; Martin, O.; Maxfield, C.; McClean, J. R.; Meeks, S.; Megrant, A.; Molavi, R.;
      Molina,  S.;  Montazeri,  S.;  Movassagh,  R.;  Newman,  M.;  Nguyen,  A.;  Nguyen,  M.;

      Ni, C.-H.; Oas, L.; Orosco, R.; Ottosson, K.; Pizzuto, A.; Potter, R.; Pritchard, O.;

      Quintana,  C.;  Ramachandran,  G.;  Reagor,  M.  J.;  Rhodes,  D.  M.;  Rosenberg,  E.;

      Rossi, E.; Sankaragomathi, K.; Schurkus, H. F.; Shearn, M. J.; Shorter, A.; Shutty, N.;

      Shvarts, V.; Small, S.; Smith, W. C.; Springer, S.; Sterling, G.; Suchard, J.; Szasz, A.;

      Sztein, A.; Thor, D.; Tomita, E.; Torres, A.; Torunbalci, M. M.; Vaishnav, A.; Var-

      gas, J.;  Vdovichev, S.;  Vidal, G.;  Vollgraff Heidweiller, C.;  Waltman, S.;  Waltz, J.;

      Wang, S. X.; Ware, B.; Weidel, T.; White, T.; Wong, K.; Woo, B. W. K.; Woodson, M.;

      Xing, C.; Yao, Z. J.; Yeh, P.; Ying, B.; Yoo, J.; Yosri, N.; Young, G.; Zalcman, A.;

      Zhang,  Y.;  Zhu,  N.;  Boixo,  S.;  Kelly,  J.;  Smelyanskiy,  V.;  Neven,  H.;  Bacon,  D.;

      Chen, Z.; Klimov, P. V.; Roushan, P.; Neill, C.; Chen, Y.; Morvan, A. Demonstration
      of dynamic surface codes.Nat. Phys.2025,21, 1994–2001.

(89)Acharya, R.; Abanin, D. A.; Aghababaie-Beni, L.; Aleiner, I.; Andersen, T. I.; Ans-

      mann,  M.;  Arute,  F.;  Arya,  K.;  Asfaw,  A.;  Astrakhantsev,  N.;  Atalaya,  J.;  Bab-

      bush, R.; Bacon, D.; Ballard, B.; Bardin, J. C.; Bausch, J.; Bengtsson, A.; Bilmes, A.;

      Blackwell, S.; Boixo, S.; Bortoli, G.; Bourassa, A.; Bovaird, J.; Brill, L.; Broughton, M.;

                                                        35
Browne,  D.  A.;  Buchea,  B.;  Buckley,  B.  B.;  Buell,  D.  A.;  Burger,  T.;  Burkett,  B.;

Bushnell, N.; Cabrera, A.; Campero, J.; Chang, H.-S.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Z.; Chiaro, B.;

Chik, D.; Chou, C.; Claes, J.; Cleland, A. Y.; Cogan, J.; Collins, R.; Conner, P.; Court-

ney, W.; Crook, A. L.; Curtin, B.; Das, S.; Davies, A.; De Lorenzo, L.; Debroy, D. M.;

Demura,  S.;  Devoret,  M.;  Di  Paolo,  A.;  Donohoe,  P.;  Drozdov,  I.;  Dunsworth,  A.;

Earle, C.; Edlich, T.; Eickbusch, A.; Elbag, A. M.; Elzouka, M.; Erickson, C.; Faoro, L.;

Farhi,  E.;  Ferreira,  V.  S.;  Flores  Burgos,  L.;  Forati,  E.;  Fowler,  A.  G.;  Foxen,  B.;

Ganjam, S.;  Garcia, G.;  Gasca, R.;  Genois,  ´E.;  Giang, W.;  Gidney, C.;  Gilboa, D.;

Gosula, R.; Grajales Dau, A.; Graumann, D.; Greene, A.; Gross, J. A.; Habegger, S.;

Hall, J.; Hamilton, M. C.; Hansen, M.; Harrigan, M. P.; Harrington, S. D.; Heras, F.

J.  H.;  Heslin,  S.;  Heu,  P.;  Higgott,  O.;  Hill,  G.;  Hilton,  J.;  Holland,  G.;  Hong,  S.;
Huang, H.-Y.;  Huff, A.;  Huggins, W. J.;  Ioffe, L. B.;  Isakov, S. V.;  Iveland, J.;  Jef-

frey, E.;  Jiang, Z.;  Jones, C.;  Jordan, S.;  Joshi, C.;  Juhas, P.;  Kafri, D.;  Kang, H.;

Karamlou,  A.  H.;  Kechedzhi,  K.;  Kelly,  J.;  Khaire,  T.;  Khattar,  T.;  Khezri,  M.;

Kim,  S.;  Klimov,  P.  V.;  Klots,  A.  R.;  Kobrin,  B.;  Kohli,  P.;  Korotkov,  A.  N.;

Kostritsa,  F.;  Kothari,  R.;  Kozlovskii,  B.;  Kreikebaum,  J.  M.;  Kurilovich,  V.  D.;

Lacroix,  N.;  Landhuis,  D.;  Lange-Dei,  T.;  Langley,  B.  W.;  Laptev,  P.;  Lau,  K.-M.;

Le Guevel, L.;  Ledford, J.;  Lee, J.;  Lee, K.;  Lensky, Y. D.;  Leon, S.;  Lester, B. J.;

Li, W. Y.; Li, Y.; Lill, A. T.; Liu, W.; Livingston, W. P.; Locharla, A.; Lucero, E.; Lun-

dahl, D.; Lunt, A.; Madhuk, S.; Malone, F. D.; Maloney, A.; Mandr`a, S.; Manyika, J.;

Martin,  L.  S.;  Martin,  O.;  Martin,  S.;  Maxfield,  C.;  McClean,  J.  R.;  McEwen,  M.;

Meeks, S.;  Megrant, A.;  Mi, X.;  Miao, K. C.;  Mieszala, A.;  Molavi, R.;  Molina, S.;
Montazeri, S.; Morvan, A.; Movassagh, R.; Mruczkiewicz, W.; Naaman, O.; Neeley, M.;

Neill, C.; Nersisyan, A.; Neven, H.; Newman, M.; Ng, J. H.; Nguyen, A.; Nguyen, M.;

Ni, C.-H.;  Niu, M. Y.;  O’Brien, T. E.;  Oliver, W. D.;  Opremcak, A.;  Ottosson, K.;

Petukhov,  A.;  Pizzuto,  A.;  Platt,  J.;  Potter,  R.;  Pritchard,  O.;  Pryadko,  L.  P.;

Quintana,  C.;  Ramachandran,  G.;  Reagor,  M.  J.;  Redding,  J.;  Rhodes,  D.  M.;


                                                  36
      Roberts,  G.;  Rosenberg,  E.;  Rosenfeld,  E.;  Roushan,  P.;  Rubin,  N.  C.;  Saei,  N.;

      Sank,  D.;  Sankaragomathi,  K.;  Satzinger,  K.  J.;  Schurkus,  H.  F.;  Schuster,  C.;  Se-

      nior, A. W.; Shearn, M. J.; Shorter, A.; Shutty, N.; Shvarts, V.; Singh, S.; Sivak, V.;

      Skruzny, J.;  Small, S.;  Smelyanskiy, V.;  Smith, W. C.;  Somma, R. D.;  Springer, S.;

      Sterling,  G.;  Strain,  D.;  Suchard,  J.;  Szasz,  A.;  Sztein,  A.;  Thor,  D.;  Torres,  A.;

      Torunbalci, M. M.; Vaishnav, A.; Vargas, J.; Vdovichev, S.; Vidal, G.; Villalonga, B.;

      Vollgraff Heidweiller, C.; Waltman, S.; Wang, S. X.; Ware, B.; Weber, K.; Weidel, T.;

      White, T.; Wong, K.; Woo, B. W. K.; Xing, C.; Yao, Z. J.; Yeh, P.; Ying, B.; Yoo, J.;

      Yosri, N.;  Young, G.;  Zalcman, A.;  Zhang, Y.;  Zhu, N.;  Zobrist, N. Quantum error

      correction below the surface code threshold.Nature2025,638, 920–926.

(90)Cai,  Z.;  Babbush,  R.;  Benjamin,  S.  C.;  Endo,  S.;  Huggins,  W.  J.;  Li,  Y.;  Mc-

      Clean, J. R.;  O’Brien, T. E. Quantum error mitigation.Rev.  Mod.  Phys.2023, 95,

      045005.

(91)Knill, E. Fault-tolerant postselected quantum computation:  Schemes.arXiv preprint

      quant-ph/04021712004,

(92)Knill, E. Fault-tolerant postselected quantum computation: Threshold analysis.arXiv

      preprint quant-ph/04041042004,

(93)Kandala,  A.;  Temme,  K.;  C´orcoles,  A.  D.;  Mezzacapo,  A.;  Chow,  J.  M.;  Gam-

      betta,  J.  M.  Error  mitigation  extends  the  computational  reach  of  a  noisy  quantum

      processor.Nature2019,567, 491–495.

(94)Kim,  Y.;  Wood,  C.  J.;  Yoder,  T.  J.;  Merkel,  S.  T.;  Gambetta,  J.  M.;  Temme,  K.;

      Kandala, A. Scalable error mitigation for noisy quantum circuits produces competitive

      expectation values.Nat. Phys.2023,19, 752–759.

(95)Cerezo, M.;  Arrasmith, A.;  Babbush, R.;  Benjamin, S. C.;  Endo, S.;  Fujii, K.;  Mc-



                                                        37
        Clean,  J.  R.;  Mitarai,  K.;  Yuan,  X.;  Cincio,  L.;  Coles,  P.  J.  Variational  quantum

        algorithms.Nat. Rev. Phys.2021,3, 625–644.

 (96)Gonthier, J. F.; Radin, M. D.; Buda, C.; Doskocil, E. J.; Abuan, C. M.; Romero, J.

        Measurements as a roadblock to near-term practical quantum advantage in chemistry:

        Resource analysis.Phys. Rev. Res.2022,4, 033154.

 (97)Patel,  S.;  Jayakumar,  P.;  Yen,  T.-C.;  Izmaylov,  A.  F.  Quantum  measurement  for

        quantum chemistry on a quantum computer.Chem. Rev.2025,125, 7490–7524.

 (98)Lee, G.; Choi, S.; Huh, J.; Izmaylov, A. F. Efficient strategies for reducing sampling

        error in quantum Krylov subspace diagonalization.Digit. Discov.2025,4, 954–969.

 (99)Robledo-Moreno, J.; Motta, M.; Haas, H.; Javadi-Abhari, A.; Jurcevic, P.; Kirby, W.;

        Martiel,  S.;   Sharma,  K.;   Sharma,  S.;   Shirakawa,  T.;   Sitdikov,  I.;   Sun,  R.-Y.;

        Sung, K. J.; Takita, M.; Tran, M. C.; Yunoki, S.; Mezzacapo, A. Chemistry beyond the

        scale of exact diagonalization on a quantum-centric supercomputer.Sci. Adv.2025,

        11, adu9991.

(100)Nakagawa, Y. O.; Kamoshita, M.; Mizukami, W.; Sudo, S.; Ohnishi, Y.-y. ADAPT-

        QSCI: Adaptive Construction of an Input State for Quantum-Selected Configuration

        Interaction.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2024,20, 10817–10825.

(101)Barison,  S.;  Moreno,  J.  R.;  Motta,  M.  Quantum-centric  computation  of  molecular

        excited  states  with  extended  sample-based  quantum  diagonalization.Quantum  Sci.
        Tech.2025,10, 025034.

(102)Reinholdt,  P.;  Ziems,  K.  M.;  Kjellgren,  E.  R.;  Coriani,  S.;  Sauer,  S.;  Kongsted,  J.

        Exposing  a  Fatal  Flaw  in  Sample-based  Quantum  Diagonalization  Methods.arXiv

        preprint arXiv:2501.072312025,




                                                        38
(103)Zhong, D.; Munizzi, W.; Chen, H.; de Jong, A. W. Combining Error Detection and

       Mitigation:  A Hybrid Protocol for Near-Term Quantum Simulation.arXiv  preprint

       arXiv:2510.011812025,

(104)Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Quantum metrology.Phys. Rev. Lett.2006,

       96, 010401.

(105)Ding, Z.;  Li, H.;  Lin, L.;  Ni, H.; Ying, L.; Zhang, R. Quantum Multiple Eigenvalue

       Gaussian filtered Search:  an efficient and versatile quantum phase estimation method.

       Quantum2024,8, 1487.

(106)Yi,  C.;  Zhou,  C.;  Takahashi,  J.  Quantum  phase  estimation  by  compressed  sensing.

       Quantum2024,8, 1579.

(107)Ni, H.; Li, H.; Ying, L. On low-depth algorithms for quantum phase estimation.Quan-

       tum2023,7, 1165.

(108)Dutkiewicz, A.; Polla, S.; Scheurer, M.; Gogolin, C.; Huggins, W. J.; O’Brien, T. E.

       Error mitigation and circuit division for early fault-tolerant quantum phase estimation.

       PRX Quantum2025,6, 040318.

(109)Castaldo, D.; Corni, S. Heisenberg limited multiple eigenvalue estimation via off-the-
       grid compressed sensing.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.124382025,

(110)Stroschein,  T.;  Castaldo,  D.;  Reiher,  M.  Ground  and  excited-state  energies  with

       analytic  errors  and  short  time  evolution  on  a  quantum  computer.arXiv  preprint

       arXiv:2507.151482025,

(111)Dutkiewicz,  A.;  Terhal,  B.  M.;  O’Brien,  T.  E.  Heisenberg-limited  quantum  phase

       estimation of multiple eigenvalues with few control qubits.Quantum2022,6, 830.

(112)Zhang, R.; Wang, G.; Johnson, P. Computing ground state properties with early fault-

       tolerant quantum computers.Quantum2022,6, 761.

                                                       39
(113)G¨unther,  J.;  Witteveen,  F.;  Schmidhuber,  A.;  Miller,  M.;  Christandl,  M.;  Har-

       row,  A.  Phase  estimation  with  partially  randomized  time  evolution.arXiv  preprint

       arXiv:2503.056472025,

(114)Wan, K.; Berta, M.; Campbell, E. T. Randomized quantum algorithm for statistical

       phase estimation.Phys. Rev. Lett.2022,129, 030503.

(115)Hagan, M.; Wiebe, N. Composite quantum simulations.Quantum2023,7, 1181.

(116)Kiumi,  C.;  Koczor,  B.  TE-PAI:  exact  time  evolution  by  sampling  random  circuits.

       Quantum Science and Technology2025,10, 045071.

(117)Toshio, R.; Akahoshi, Y.; Fujisaki, J.; Oshima, H.; Sato, S.; Fujii, K. Practical quan-
       tum advantage on partially fault-tolerant quantum computer.Phys. Rev. X2025,15,

       021057.

(118)Yamamoto, K.; Duffield, S.; Kikuchi, Y.; Mu˜noz Ramo, D. Demonstrating Bayesian

       quantum phase estimation with quantum error detection.Phys.  Rev.  Res.2024, 6,

       013221.

(119)Blunt, N. S.; Caune, L.; Izs´ak, R.; Campbell, E. T.; Holzmann, N. Statistical phase

       estimation and error mitigation on a superconducting quantum processor.PRX Quan-

       tum2023,4, 040341.

(120)Vandaele, V. Lower T-count with faster algorithms.Quantum2025,9, 1860.

(121)DalFavero, B.; LaRose, R. Error mitigation for partially error-corrected quantum com-

       puters.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.109052025,

(122)Luthra,  S.;   Moylett,  A.  E.;   Browne,  D.  E.;   Campbell,  E.  T.  Unlocking  early

       fault-tolerant  quantum  computing  with  mitigated  magic  dilution.arXiv  preprint

       arXiv:2505.105132025,



                                                       40
(123)Erakovic, M.;  Witteveen, F.;  Harley, D.;  G¨unther, J.;  Bensberg, M.;  Meitei, O. R.;

       Cho, M.; Van Voorhis, T.; Reiher, M.; Christandl, M. High ground state overlap via

       quantum embedding methods.PRX Life2025,3, 013003.

(124)Fomichev, S.; Hejazi, K.; Zini, M. S.; Kiser, M.; Fraxanet, J.; Casares, P. A. M.; Del-

       gado, A.; Huh, J.; Voigt, A.-C.; Mueller, J. E.; Arrazola, J. M. Initial state preparation

       for quantum chemistry on quantum computers.PRX Quantum2024,5, 040339.

(125)Anand, A.; Brown, K. R. Stabilizer configuration interaction:  Finding molecular sub-

       spaces with error detection properties.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.211252024,

(126)Sun, J.; Cheng, L.; Zhang, S.-X. Stabilizer ground states for simulating quantum many-

       body physics:  theory, algorithms, and applications.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08441
       2024,

(127)Low, G. H.;  Chuang, I. L. Optimal Hamiltonian simulation by quantum signal pro-

       cessing.Phys. Rev. Lett.2017,118, 010501.

(128)Berry,  D.  W.;  Motlagh,  D.;  Pantaleoni,  G.;  Wiebe,  N.  Doubling  the  efficiency  of

       Hamiltonian simulation via generalized quantum signal processing.Phys. Rev. A2024,

       110, 012612.

(129)Babbush, R.; Gidney, C.; Berry, D. W.; Wiebe, N.; McClean, J.; Paler, A.; Fowler, A.;

       Neven, H. Encoding electronic spectra in quantum circuits with linear T complexity.

       Phys. Rev. X2018,8, 041015.

(130)Low,  G.  H.;  King,  R.;  Berry,  D.  W.;  Han,  Q.;  DePrince  III,  A.  E.;  White,  A.  F.;

       Babbush,  R.;  Somma,  R.  D.;  Rubin,  N.  C.  Fast  quantum  simulation  of  electronic

       structure by spectral amplification.Phys. Rev. X2025,15, 041016.

(131)Patel, S.; Brahmachari, A. S.; Cantin, J. T.; Wang, L.; Izmaylov, A. F. Global Min-




                                                       41
        imization  of  Electronic  Hamiltonian  1-Norm  via  Linear  Programming  in  the  Block

        Invariant Symmetry Shift (BLISS) Method.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2025,

(132)Liu, D.; Zhu, S.; Low, G. H.; Lin, L.; Yang, C. Block encoding with low gate count

        for second-quantized hamiltonians.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.086442025,

(133)Tsubouchi, K.; Sagawa, T.; Yoshioka, N. Universal cost bound of quantum error mit-

        igation based on quantum estimation theory.Phys. Rev. Lett.2023,131, 210601.

(134)Martiel,  S.;  Javadi-Abhari,  A.  Low-overhead  error  detection  with  spacetime  codes.

        arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.157252025,

(135)Aharonov, D.; Alberton, O.; Arad, I.; Atia, Y.; Bairey, E.; Brakerski, Z.; Cohen, I.;
        Golan,  O.;  Gurwich,  I.;  Kenneth,  O.;  Leviatan,  E.;  Lindner,  N.  H.;  Melcer,  R.  A.;

        Meyer, A.; Schul, G.; Shutman, M. On the importance of error mitigation for quantum

        computation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.172432025,

(136)Zimbor´as,  Z.;  Koczor,  B.;  Holmes,  Z.;  Borrelli,  E.-M.;  Gily´en,  A.;  Huang,  H.-Y.;

        Cai,  Z.;  Ac´ın,  A.;  Aolita,  L.;  Banchi,  L.;  Brand˜ao,  F.  G.  S.  L.;  Cavalcanti,  D.;

        Cubitt,  T.;  Filippov,  S.  N.;  Garc´ıa-P´erez,  G.;  Goold,  J.;  K´alm´an,  O.;  Kyoseva,  E.;

        Rossi,  M.  A.  C.;  Sokolov,  B.;  Tavernelli,  I.;  Maniscalco,  S.  Myths  around  quantum

        computation before full fault tolerance:  What no-go theorems rule out and what they

        don’t.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.056942025,

(137)Langhoff, S. R.; Davidson, E. R. Configuration interaction calculations on the nitrogen
        molecule.Int. J. Quant. Chem.1974,8, 61–72.

(138)Ruedenberg, K.;  Schmidt, M. W.;  Gilbert, M. M.;  Elbert, S. Are atoms intrinsic to

        molecular electronic wavefunctions?  I. The FORS model.Chemical Physics1982,71,

        41–49.




                                                        42
(139)Diercksen,  G.  H.;  Roos,  B.  O.;  Sadlej,  A.  J.  Electron  correlation  and  properties  of

       many-electron systems.Int. J. Quant. Chem.1983,24, 265–288.

(140)Bofill, J. M.; Pulay, P. The unrestricted natural orbital–complete active space (UNO–

       CAS) method: An inexpensive alternative to the complete active space–self-consistent-

       field (CAS–SCF) method.J. Chem. Phys.1989,90, 3637–3646.

(141)Lee, T. J.; Taylor, P. R. A diagnostic for determining the quality of single-reference

       electron correlation methods.Int. J. Quant. Chem.1989,36, 199–207.

(142)Jiang, W.; DeYonker, N. J.; Wilson, A. K. Multireference character for 3d transition-

       metal-containing molecules.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2012,8, 460–468.

(143)G¨unther, J.;  Baiardi, A.;  Reiher, M.;  Christandl, M. More quantum chemistry with

       fewer qubits.Physical Review Research2024,6, 043021.

(144)Mitarai, K.; Toyoizumi, K.; Mizukami, W. Perturbation theory with quantum signal

       processing.Quantum2023,7, 1000.

(145)Hedeg˚ard,  E.  D.;  Knecht,  S.;  Kielberg,  J.  S.;  Jensen,  H.  J.  A.;  Reiher,  M.  Density

       matrix  renormalization  group  with  efficient  dynamical  electron  correlation  through

       range separation.J. Chem. Phys.2015,142.

(146)Bauman, N. P.; Low, G. H.; Kowalski, K. Quantum simulations of excited states with

       active-space downfolded Hamiltonians.The Journal of chemical physics2019,151.

(147)Szenes,  K.;  M¨orchen,  M.;  Fischill,  P.;  Reiher,  M.  Striking  the  right  balance  of  en-

       coding electron correlation in the Hamiltonian and the wavefunction ansatz.Faraday

       Discussions2024,254, 359–381.

(148)Legeza,          ¨O.; S´olyom, J. Optimizing the density-matrix renormalization group method

       using quantum information entropy.Phys. Rev. B.2003,68, 195116.



                                                        43
(149)Legeza,          ¨O.; S´olyom, J. Quantum data compression, quantum information generation,

       and the density-matrix renormalization-group method.Phys. Rev. B2004,70, 205118.

(150)Boguslawski, K.; Tecmer, P.; Legeza, O.; Reiher, M. Entanglement measures for single-

       and multireference correlation effects.J. Phys. Chem. Lett.2012,3, 3129–3135.

(151)Stein, C. J.; Reiher, M. Automated selection of active orbital spaces.J. Chem. Theory

       Comput.2016,12, 1760–1771.

(152)Stein,  C.  J.;  von  Burg,  V.;  Reiher,  M.  The  delicate  balance  of  static  and  dynamic

       electron correlation.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2016,12, 3764–3773.

(153)Stein, C. J.; Reiher, M. autoCAS: A program for fully automated multiconfigurational

       calculations.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2019,40, 2216–2226.

(154)M¨orchen, M.; Low, G. H.; Weymuth, T.; Liu, H.; Troyer, M.; Reiher, M. Classification

       of  electronic  structures  and  state  preparation  for  quantum  computation  of  reaction

       chemistry.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.089102024,

(155)Vorwerk, C.; Sheng, N.; Govoni, M.; Huang, B.; Galli, G. Quantum embedding theories

       to simulate condensed systems on quantum computers.Nat. Comp. Sci.2022,2, 424–

       432.

(156)Rossmannek, M.; Pavosevic, F.; Rubio, A.; Tavernelli, I. Quantum embedding method

       for  the  simulation  of  strongly  correlated  systems  on  quantum  computers.J.  Phys.

       Chem. Lett.2023,14, 3491–3497.

(157)Battaglia,  S.;  Rossmannek,  M.;  Rybkin,  V.  V.;  Tavernelli,  I.;  Hutter,  J.  A  general

       framework for active space embedding methods with applications in quantum com-

       puting.npj Comput. Mater.2024,10, 297.

(158)Chen, S.;  Yu, V. W.-z.;  Jin, Y.;  Govoni, M.;  Galli, G. Advances in quantum defect

       embedding theory.J. Chem. Theo. Comput.2025,21, 7797–7812.

                                                        44
(159)Weisburn, L. P.; Cho, M.; Bensberg, M.; Meitei, O. R.; Reiher, M.; Van Voorhis, T.

       Multiscale embedding for quantum computing.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2025,

(160)Bensberg,  M.;   Eckhoff,  M.;   Husistein,  R.  T.;   Teynor,  M.  S.;   Sora,  V.;   Bro-

       Jørgensen,  W.;  Thomasen,  F.  E.;  Krogh,  A.;  Lindorff-Larsen,  K.;  Solomon,  G.  C.;

       Weymuth, T.;  Reiher, M. Hierarchical quantum embedding by machine learning for

       large molecular assemblies.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2025,21, 7662–7674.

(161)Proppe, J.; Husch, T.; Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Uncertainty quantification for quan-

       tum chemical models of complex reaction networks.Faraday Discuss.2016,195, 497–

       520.

(162)Behler,   J.;    Parrinello,   M.   Generalized   neural-network   representation   of   high-
       dimensional potential-energy surfaces.Phys. Rev. Lett.2007,98, 146401.

(163)Bart´ok, A. P.; De, S.; Poelking, C.; Bernstein, N.; Kermode, J. R.; Cs´anyi, G.; Ceri-

       otti, M. Machine learning unifies the modeling of materials and molecules.Sci. Adv.

       2017,3, e1701816.

(164)Batatia,  I.;  Kovacs,  D.  P.;  Simm,  G.;  Ortner,  C.;  Cs´anyi,  G.  MACE:  Higher  order

       equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields.NeurIPS

       2022,35, 11423–11436.

(165)Kalita,  B.;  Gokcan,  H.;  Isayev,  O.  Machine  learning  interatomic  potentials  at  the

       centennial crossroads of quantum mechanics.Nature Computational Science2025,5,
       1120–1132.

(166)Lysogorskiy, Y.; Bochkarev, A.; Drautz, R. Graph atomic cluster expansion for foun-

       dational machine learning interatomic potentials.npj Comput. Mater.2026,

(167)Chen, J.; Chan, G. K. A framework for robust quantum speedups in practical corre-

       lated electronic structure and dynamics.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.157652025,


                                                       45
(168)Harrigan, M. P.;  Khattar, T.;  Yuan, C.;  Peduri, A.;  Yosri, N.;  Malone, F. D.;  Bab-

       bush, R.; Rubin, N. C. Expressing and analyzing quantum algorithms with qualtran.

       arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.046432024,

(169)Gratsea,  K.;   Otten,  M.  Achieving  Utility-Scale  Applications  through  Full  Stack

       Co-Design of Fault Tolerant Quantum Computers.arXiv  preprint  arXiv:2510.26547

       2025,

(170)Gambetta,  J.  IBM’s  roadmap  for  scaling  quantum  technology. IBM  Research  Blog

       (September 2020)2020,

(171)Castaldo, D.; Jahangiri, S.; Delgado, A.; Corni, S. Quantum simulation of molecules

       in solution.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2022,18, 7457–7469.

(172)Steudtner, M.; Morley-Short, S.; Pol, W.; Sim, S.; Cortes, C. L.; Loipersberger, M.;

       Parrish, R. M.; Degroote, M.; Moll, N.; Santagati, R.; Streif, M. Fault-tolerant quan-

       tum computation of molecular observables.Quantum2023,7, 1164.

(173)Castaldo, D.;  Jahangiri, S.;  Migliore, A.;  Arrazola, J. M.;  Corni, S. A differentiable

       quantum phase estimation algorithm.Quantum Sci. Tech.2024,9, 045026.

(174)Izs´ak,  R.;  Riplinger,  C.;  Blunt,  N.  S.;  de  Souza,  B.;  Holzmann,  N.;  Crawford,  O.;

       Camps, J.;  Neese, F.;  Schopf, P. Quantum computing in pharma:  A multilayer em-

       bedding approach for near future applications.J. Comp. Chem.2023,44, 406–421.

(175)Huang, P.-W.; Boyd, G.; Anselmetti, G.-L. R.; Degroote, M.; Moll, N.; Santagati, R.;
       Streif, M.; Ries, B.; Marti-Dafcik, D.; Jnane, H.; Simon, S.; Wiebe, N.; Bromley, T. R.;

       Koczor, B. Fullqubit alchemist:  Quantum algorithm for alchemical free energy calcu-

       lations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.167192025,

(176)G¨unther,   J.;    Weymuth,   T.;    Bensberg,   M.;    Witteveen,   F.;    Teynor,   M.   S.;

       Thomasen,  F.  E.;  Sora,  V.;  Bro-Jørgensen,  W.;  Husistein,  R.  T.;  Erakovic,  M.,


                                                       46
        et al. How to use quantum computers for biomolecular free energies.arXiv  preprint

        arXiv:2506.205872025,

(177)Baker, N. A.; Bilodeau, B.; Chen, C.; Chen, Y.; Eckhoff, M.; Efimovskaya, A.; Gas-

        parotto,  P.;  van  Gerwen,  P.;  Gong,  R.;  Hoang,  K.;  Hooshmand,  Z.;  Jenkins,  A.  J.;

        Johnston, C. S. N.; Li, R. R.; Liang, J.; Liu, H.; Mills, A.; M¨orchen, M.; Nishibuchi, G.;

        Sun, C.; Ticehurst, B.; Troyer, M.; Unsleber, J. P.; Wernli, S.; Williams-Young, D. B.;

        Zhang, B. QDK/Chemistry: A Modular Toolkit for Quantum Chemistry Applications.

        arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.152532026,

(178)Barber, B.; Barnes, K. M.; Bialas, T.; Bu˘gdaycı, O.; Campbell, E. T.; Gillespie, N. I.;

        Johar,  K.;  Rajan,  R.;  Richardson,  A.  W.;  Skoric,  L.;  Topal,  C.;  Turner,  M.  L.;
        Ziad, A. B. A real-time,  scalable,  fast and resource-efficient decoder for a quantum

        computer.Nat. Electron.2025, 1–8.

(179)Viviani,  P.;   Rocco,  R.;   Barbieri,  M.;   Bettonte,  G.;   Boella,  E.;   Cipollini,  M.;

        Frassineti,  J.;  Ganz,  F.;  Marzella,  S.;  Ottaviani,  D.;  Rizzo,  S.;  Scionti,  A.;  Ver-

        cellino, C.; Vitali, G.; Terzo, O.; Montrucchio, B.; Gregori, D. Assessing the Elephant

        in  the  Room  in  Scheduling  for  Current  Hybrid  HPC-QC  Clusters.arXiv  preprint

        arXiv:2504.105202025,

(180)Delgado, A.; Date, P. Defining quantum-ready primitives for hybrid HPC-QC super-

        computing:  a  case  study  in  Hamiltonian  simulation.Front.  Comput.  Sci.2025, 7,

        1528985.

(181)Martin, M. J.; Hughes, C.; Moreno, G.; Jones, E. B.; Sickinger, D.; Narumanchi, S.;

        Grout, R. Energy use in quantum data centers:  Scaling the impact of computer ar-

        chitecture, qubit performance, size, and thermal parameters.IEEE  Transactions  on

        Sustainable Computing2022,7, 864–874.




                                                        47
(182)Jaschke, D.; Montangero, S. Is quantum computing green?  An estimate for an energy-

        efficiency quantum advantage.Quantum Sci. Technol.2023,8, 025001.

(183)Berger,  C.;   Di  Paolo,  A.;   Forrest,  T.;   Hadfield,  S.;   Sawaya,  N.;   Stkech ly,  M.;

        Thibault, K. Quantum technologies for climate change: Preliminary assessment.arXiv

        preprint arXiv:2107.053622021,

(184)Arute, F.; Arya, K.; Babbush, R.; Bacon, D.; Bardin, J. C.; Barends, R.; Biswas, R.;

        Boixo, S.; Brandao, F. G.; Buell, D. A.; Burkett, B.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Z.; Chiaro, B.;

        Collins,  R.;  Courtney,  W.;  Dunsworth,  A.;  Farhi,  E.;  Foxen,  B.;  Fowler,  A.;  Gid-

        ney,  C.;  Giustina,  M.;  Graff,  R.;  Guerin,  K.;  Habegger,  S.;  Harrigan,  M.  P.;  Hart-

        mann, M. J.;  Ho, A.;  Hoffmann, M.;  Huang, T.;  Humble, T. S.;  Isakov, S. V.;  Jef-

        frey,  E.;  Jiang,  Z.;  Kafri,  D.;  Kechedzhi,  K.;  Kelly,  J.;  Klimov,  P.  V.;  Knysh,  S.;

        Korotkov,  A.;  Kostritsa,  F.;  Landhuis,  D.;  Lindmark,  M.;  Lucero,  E.;  Lyakh,  D.;

        Mandra,  S.;  McClean,  J.  R.;  McEwen,  M.;  Megrant,  A.;  Mi,  X.;  Michielsen,  K.;
        Mohseni,  M.;   Mutus,  J.;   Naaman,  O.;   Neeley,  M.;   Neill,  C.;   Niu,  M.  Y.;   Os-

        tby,  E.;  Petukhov,  A.;  Platt,  J.  C.;  Quintana,  C.;  Rieffel,  E.  G.;  Roushan,  P.;  Ru-

        bin, N. C.; Sank, D.; Satzinger, K. J.; Smelyanskiy, V.; Sung, K. J.; Trevithick, M. D.;

        Vainsencher, A.; Villalonga, B.; White, T.; Yao, Z. J.; Yeh, P.; Zalcman, A.; Neven, H.;

        Martinis, J. M. Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting proces-

        sor.Nature2019,574, 505–510.

(185)Fellous-Asiani, M.; Chai, J. H.; Thonnart, Y.; Ng, H. K.; Whitney, R. S.; Auff`eves, A.

        Optimizing resource efficiencies for scalable full-stack quantum computers.PRX Quan-

        tum2023,4, 040319.

(186)Campbell,  S.;   d’Amico,  I.;   Ciampini,  M.  A.;   Anders,  J.;   Ares,  N.;   Artini,  S.;

        Auff`eves, A.; Oftelie, L. B.; Bettmann, L. P.; Bonan¸ca, M. V.; Busch, T.; Campisi, M.;

        Cavalcante,  M.  F.;  Correa,  L.  A.;  Cuestas,  E.;  Dag,  C.  B.;  Dago,  S.;  Deffner,  S.;

        Del  Campo,  A.;  Deutschmann-Olek,  A.;  Donadi,  S.;  Doucet,  E.;  Elouard,  C.;  En-

                                                          48
        sslin,  K.;   Erker,  P.;   Fabbri,  N.;   Fedele,  F.;   Fiusa,  G.;   Fogarty,  T.;   Folk,  J.;

        Guarnieri, G.; Hegde, A. S.; Hern´andez-G´omez, S.; Hu, C.-K.; Iemini, F.; Karimi, B.;

        Kiesel, N.; Landi, G. T.; Lasek, A.; Lemziakov, S.; Lo Monaco, G.; Lutz, E.; Lvov, D.;

        Maillet,  O.;  Mehboudi,  M.;  Mendon¸ca,  T.  M.;  Miller,  H.  J.  D.;  Mitchell,  A.  K.;

        Mitchison, M. T.;  Mukherjee, V.;  Paternostro, M.;  Pekola, J.;  Perarnau-Llobet, M.;

        Poschinger, U.;  Rolandi, A.;  Rosa, D.;  S´anchez, R.;  Santos, A. C.;  Sarthour, R. S.;

        Sela, E.; Solfanelli, A.; Souza, A. M.; Splettstoesser, J.; Tan, D.; Tesser, L.; Vu, T. V.;

        Widera, A.; Yunger Halpern, N.; Zawadzki, K. Roadmap on quantum thermodynam-

        ics.Quantum Science and Technology2025,

(187)Arora,  N.;  Kumar,  P.  Sustainable  quantum  computing:   Opportunities  and  chal-
        lenges  of  benchmarking  carbon  in  the  quantum  computing  lifecycle.arXiv  preprint

        arXiv:2408.056792024,































                                                         49