 SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


                                       Replica Tensor Train

                   Miha Srdinšek1⋆  , Gabriel Gouraud1†   and Xavier Waintal1‡

  1Université Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Grenoble INP, IRIG, Pheliqs, F-38000 Grenoble, France

        ⋆mihasrdinsek@gmail.com,    †gab.gouraud@gmail.com,    ‡xavier.waintal@cea.fr


Abstract

We describe a numerical many-body technique that is based on both tensor networks
and quantum Monte Carlo.  The variational ansatz is a tensor network that can harvest
volume-law entanglement.  It is constructed from a tensor train to which one applies
a set of non-local operators that force several indices of the tensor train to represent
the same physical index, hence its name – replica tensor train (RTT). From the tensor
network toolbox, it inherits the possibility to make linear combinations of these states
and apply a certain class of operators. We can therefore find the ground-state of a local
Hamiltonian in a purely algebraic way as in standard tensor network algorithms – i.e.
without using gradient descent methods.  On the other hand, the volume-law structure
forbids calculating physical observables directly. In much the same way as on a quantum
computer where one can prepare a state but can only sample it at the end, here we have
to use Markov Chain Monte Carlo to compute the observables. We further show that the
approach can be extended to build Krylov-subspace ground-state methods within the
variational manifold.  We illustrate the different algorithms on a two-dimensional spin
model with a transverse magnetic field, which can be solved by this approach at low
computational cost.



1 Introduction

Finding the ground-state of a quantum many-body problem is hindered by the exponential
growth of the Hilbert space size with the numberNof particles (e.g., spins, qubits, or fermionic
sites).  It is very tempting, and often effective, to focus on a small part of the Hilbert space,
the one we expect to be relevant, i.e. to use a variational approach to the problem. However,
not all variational approaches are born equal.  Thecomputability, i.e.  the mathematical tools
at our disposal to compute with them has strong variations with the underlying class of wave
functions.  A second thing that varies is theexpressivityof the ansatz, i.e.  its ability to ap-
proximate the true ground-state for a given size of the variational manifold. Often, one must
compromise and give up some computability in exchange for an increased expressivity.
    In terms of computability, the gold standard are arguably the matrix product states (MPS).
This one-dimensional tensor network ansatz has everything that one could dream of:  it can
be sampled exactly, two states can be added together, calculating local observables is straight-
forward, and we have powerful algebraic approaches to find the ground-state – i.e., the cele-
brated DMRG algorithm[1,2].  The only drawback of MPS is that its expressivity is excellent
for one-dimensional problems[3,4], but somewhat limited for two-dimensional problems and
beyond.  Its two-dimensional tensor network generalization, PEPS, essentially solves the ex-
pressivity problem.  However, there is a large cost in computability:  finding the ground-state
becomes a much more complex affair and the computational cost increases drastically[5].


                                                       1
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



    At the other extreme of the spectrum, one finds ansätze with limited internal structure:
we only know how to evaluate the unnormalized wave function for a given configuration
and,  thanks to automatic differentiation,  we can easily calculate the gradient of the wave
function with respect to its parameters.  With such properties, we are left with a unique path
for calculating the observables and finding the ground-state:  Markov chain Monte Carlo and
energy minimization with noisy gradient descent. This approach is known as variational Monte
Carlo (VMC)[6–8].   Since there are almost no constraints for constructing a VMC ansatz,
highly expressive ones can be built. A natural choice for such constructions is to use a neural
network.  For instance, convolutional image processing models that retain a notion of space
and locality, and language processing transformer models, which describe complex long-range
correlations via an attention mechanism.  The resulting neural quantum states (NQS) have
become very popular[9–17].   Despite the field being rather recent,  very promising results
have been obtained.  Yet, we think that it is fair to state that the noisy gradient descent in a
non-convex manifold is not ideal:  it requires a large number of optimization steps and there
is no guarantee of convergence (presence of local minima or barren plateaus).
    Researchers on both sides are seeking solutions to this computability-expressivity duality
problem. On the NQS side, they try to add more structure. For instance, one can build objects
that automatically capture the antisymmetry of the wave function[15]or certain symme-
tries such as translational invariance[18].  On the tensor network side, one can decrease the
computational burden by using Markov Chain Monte Carlo on PEPS[19–21]or increase the
expressivity through String Bond States (SBS)[22–24]or embed MPS inside NQS[25–30].
This is a very active and quickly evolving field. Indeed, with the techniques already available
to us, there is increasing evidence that we are not far from solving the founding models of the
field, such as the Hubbard model[31–33].
    The purpose of this article is to address the above problem through a new mathematical
object – we shall call it a Replica Tensor Train (RTT) – that has interesting mathematical prop-
erties.  As we shall see, the RTT is an extension of MPS that allows one to quite dramatically
increase the expressivity of the MPS while keeping some of its core algebraic properties. The
main appeal of RTT, and chief result of this paper, is that while it can harvest volume-law
entanglement with low bond dimension, we shall be able to find the ground-state within the
RTT manifoldwithoutresorting to gradient descent.
    In a nutshell, an RTT is a long tensor train where several sites of the tensor network cor-
respond to the same physical spin, see Fig.1for a schematic. The RTT ansatz is introduced in
four different, but equivalent ways in section2:
    •as an MPS where physical indices appear more than once,

    •as an “MPS of MPS”,

    •as a tensor network,

    •and as an MPS embedded in a quantum error correction code (An MPS with a set of
       stabilizers).
We show that these different formulations provide different insights, allowing us to construct
our formalism.
    In Section3, we provide the algorithms for finding the ground-state of a given Hamiltonian.
The algorithms are rather peculiar:  on the one hand, the ground-state can be constructed in
a fully algebraic way using only tensor network tools such as tensor contraction and singular
value decomposition (as in the DMRG algorithm). On the other hand, to compute any observ-
able, one must sample the state using Markov chain Monte Carlo. In some sense, the situation
is very similar to that of a quantum computer where we can construct the state algebraically
using quantum gates, but the sampling of qubits is still needed for measuring anything.

                                                         2
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission











      Figure 1: The RTT ansatz compared to other tensor networks (TN). (a) A toy model:
      a 3×3 grid of 9 spins.  (b) Schematic of an MPS that goes through these spins in
      a snake-like manner.  Some spins may be close by on the lattice but far away in the
      MPS structure. (c) A PEPS ansatz for the same lattice. The connectivity of the PEPS
      naturally respects the local connections between spins. (d) The RTT ansatz consists
      of a first (red) MPS followed by a second (blue) MPS such that different sites of the
      tensor network correspond to a unique physical spin.


    In Section4, we illustrate the above on a 20×20 two-dimensional transverse-field Ising
model.


2 Replica Tensor Trains

In this section, we build the Replica Tensor Train (RTT). The RTT is a variational ansatz that
has special algebraic properties, which will allow us to build new algorithmic procedures for
finding ground-states of many-body systems.

2.1Preliminary remark: Tensor Trains versus Matrix Product States

The concepts of Matrix Product States and Tensor Trains are used interchangeably in the liter-
ature, the former originating from quantum many-body physics and the latter from mathemat-
ics. For the purpose of this article, it will be important to properly separate the two concepts.
We define a TT (Tensor Train)φ           i1,...i    Ω  withΩdiscrete variablesi                                1,i 2...i   Ω, wherei    α∈{0, 1},
(the generalization to dimensions larger than 2 is trivial) as,

                                              φi1,...i    Ω =TrA      i11 Ai22 . . .A iΩΩ .                                                 (1)

Aiαα  is a set of twoχ   α×χ α+1     matricesA                  0α andA        1α (or in tensor network language a tensor with
three indices) where, by convention, the first and last bond dimensionsχ        α are set to unity:
χ1 =χ   Ω+1     =1. A TT is just a tensor network. It can represent any large tensorφ                 i1,...i    Ω without,
a priori, any connection to a quantum many-body state.
    What we call an MPS, on the other hand, is a TT used to represent a quantum many-body
state (this was its actual original meaning before these objects started to be used for many
new purposes).  We consider a system withNspins, qubits or fermionic occupation states.  A
basis set for our Hilbert space is|s〉=|s              1...s    N〉wheres     α∈{0, 1}is the state of the chosen
spin/qubit. A general quantum state|Ψ〉takes the form,
                                                         X
                                                |Ψ〉=          ψs1...s    N|s〉.                                                    (2)
                                                          s

We define the MPS as a state whereψ             s1...s    N is a TT withΩ=N. In this article we will construct
other quantum states, also defined with TTs, but withΩ≥N.




                                                             3
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


2.2Four equivalent definitions of RTT
We now construct the Replica TT quantum state. There are four different but equivalent ways
of defining the RTT, each providing different insights which will later be useful in the discussion
of different algorithms.

2.2.1RTT as a TT with repeated appearance of the physical degrees of freedom

We define an RTT as follows:  we consider a TTφ   i1...i   Ω  withΩ≥N.  As an example, in the
actual applications discussed later, we will haveΩ=2NorΩ=4N. We introduce a function
j=σ(ω)that takes one of the tensorsω∈{1...Ω}as an input and returns one of the spins
j∈{1...N}as an output. The RTT is then defined as,

                                            ψs1...s    N  =TrA      sσ(1)1    Asσ(2)2    . . .A sσ(Ω)Ω    .                                             (3)

In other words, an RTT is a generalization of MPS where each physical degree of freedom may
appear more than once, i.e. may be replicated. For later use, we introduce the setR       j =σ −1  (j)
which enumerates the different replica tensors of the TT for a given physical index. Its size is
|R  j|. The different elements ofR      j are designated byR      ja∈{1..Ω}. By construction    Pj|R  j|=Ω
andσ(R              ja) =j,∀a∈{1..|R                      j|}.
     The functionσ(ω)is best understood graphically as a discrete "path" between the physical
degrees of freedom; the parameterωis the "time" of the parametrized curve.  Importantly,
this path visits the different physical degrees of freedom more than once. Let us illustrate the
above construction on a practical example.  We consider a small system of 6 spins on a 2D
lattice like so,



The pathσ(ω)withΩ=Nwhich we call the "horizontal ordering" can be visualized as,

                                 σH(ω) =                                                                                      (4)

Since the ordering of the physical sites has been preserved, this path is simply the identity
functionσ(ω) =ωand the resulting RTT reduces to a simple MPS,

                                                 ψHs1...s    6 =TrA      s11 As22 . . .A s66 .                                                  (5)

However, a different ordering of the tensors is also possible. For instance, the "vertical order-
ing",

                                 σV (ω) =                                                                                     (6)

that also corresponds to a plain MPS but with a different ordering of the tensors,

                                             ψVs1...s    6 =TrA      s41 As32 As23 As54 As65 As16 .                                             (7)

Our first non-MPS RTT combines both the vertical and the horizontal orderings like so,


                                σHV (ω) =                                                                                     (8)





                                                                4
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



which corresponds explicitly to the following state:

                                           ψHVs1...s    6 =TrA      s11 As22 As33 As44 As55 As66
                                                         As47 As38 As29 As510As611As112                                                  (9)

We observe in particular that the path goes through all the connections between the spins, i.e.
if two spins are neighbors physically, they are also neighbors insomepart of the RTT.
     For later reference, we define the sumσ=σ                 1⊕σ    2 of two pathsσ            1(ω)of sizeΩ                1 and
σ2(ω)of sizeΩ                2 as the path of sizeΩ=Ω                1 +Ω    2 that goes first through the sites ofσ    1 and
then through those ofσ    2:
                                              ¤σ1(ω)∀ω∈{1···Ω                      1}
                                  σ(ω) =        σ2(ω−Ω          1)∀ω∈{Ω            1 +1···Ω}                                           (10)


With this notation, we haveσ          HV =σ    H⊕σ    V . Another example of pathσis shown in Fig.1d.

2.2.2RTT as a nested MPS of MPS
Another way of viewing an RTT is as an "MPS of MPS".  For the sake of clarity, let us suppose
that the functionσ(ω)goes through all the physical sites once, then again through all the sites
a second time (in a different order), then again untilΩ=KN.  We call such a state an RTT
withKorderings (withKreplicas per site). Defining

                                           φ(i)s   =A    sσ(1+iN)1+iN      Asσ(2+iN)2+iN       . . .A sσ(N+iN)N+iN                                                (11)

we arrive at,                              X       φ(0)      φ(1)                        
                                ψs =                   s    α0     s    α0α1···φ(K−1)s       αK−2                                (12)
                                        α0...α    K−2
justifying the name “an MPS of MPS”, as each tensor network[φ                      (i)s  ]αβ corresponds to a regular
MPS. It follows automatically from this remark that RTT generalizes MPS, as well as String
Bond States which are a rank 1 product of MPS. However, this construction shows that an
RTT does not only allow for a product of different MPS, but also for any linear combinations
between them.  Last, since it has been shown that String Bond States naturally encompass
Restricted Boltzmann Machine[24], it follows that RTT contains this class of neural networks
as well.

2.2.3RTT as a tensor network

A third way of viewing an RTT is as a tensor network made of the underlying TT together
with Kronecker tensors that enforce the link between the variables of the TT and the physical
degrees of freedom.
     The Kronecker tensor, also known as the copy tensor, is defined asδ     i jk  =δ    i jδjk.  It en-
forces the fact that all its indices must be equal (and may also be defined with four or more
indices). The binding between a spins   α and the tensors in RTT can be expressed as a contrac-
tion between the TT of the RTT and the tensor

                                                                 |R  j|Y
                                                     δ(j)sj,R  j =    δsj,R  ja.                                                    (13)
                                                                 a=1
In this notation, the RTT can be rewritten as the following tensor network contraction,
                                                   X                           NY
                                          ψs =           TrA  i11 Ai22 . . .A iΩΩ δ(j)sj,R  j                                        (14)
                                                   i1...i   Ω                 j=1

                                                                 5
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



     Once again, such a contraction is best viewed graphically using standard tensor network
drawing conventions. Einstein summation is assumed on any connection between two tensors.
For our RTTψ   HVs1...s    6, it reads,




                      ψHVs1...s    6 =



where the empty circles correspond to the Kronecker tensors,

                                                                                        .                                      (15)

     To proceed and analyze the structure of this peculiar tensor network, let us name separately
the TT part and the Kronecker part. We denote the TT part,

                                             φi =φ    i1...i   Ω =TrA      i11 Ai22 . . .A iΩΩ                                            (16)

whereiis a shortcut fori= (i                        1, ...i   Ω), and the Kronecker part as,

                                                               NY
                                                     Cs,i   =      δ(j)sj,R  j,                                                      (17)
                                                               j=1

whereCstands for constraint. With this new notation we have,
                                                             X
                                                     ψs =         Cs,i φi                                                      (18)
                                                               i

which can be viewed as a simple matrix-vector multiplication

                                                          ψ=Cφ                                                         (19)

in the exponentially large spaces spanned by(s       1...s    N )and(i            1...i   Ω)which we call, respectively,
thephysical spaceand thereplica space.
     We are now going to make a simple algebraic remark on which are based all the subsequent
developments of this article.  Suppose that we want to apply an operatorAon our stateψ.
For instance,Acan be the HamiltonianHof the problem but we will also use other operators.
Now, further suppose that we know how to commuteAwithC.  In other words, we suppose
that we can compute  ¯Asuch that,
                                                         AC=C         ¯A                                                        (20)
What do we gain from this construction? Essentially, we recover the crucial ability to perform
linear combinations of wavefunctions while keeping the ansatz in the same RTT form. Indeed,
suppose that we want to constructψ     ′ =ψ+Aψ. We trivially haveψ        ′ =Cφ  ′ withφ   ′ =φ+       ¯Aφ.
As we shall see below, computing   ¯Aφwill be a straightforward tensor network contraction
yielding a new TT; the resulting sum simply amounts to adding two TTs, a standard TT process
which yields another TT (see e.g. Section 8.2 of Ref.[34]). The capacity to perform these linear
combinations is crucial and will provide us with the direct means of finding the ground-state
of a problem without resorting to the stochastic gradient descent used in variational Monte
Carlo.
     We now show that  ¯Acan be constructed with simple rules whenAis written as a sum of
Pauli strings, i.e. is a polynomial in the three Pauli matricesX                   i,Y i andZ        i acting on spini. Spin

                                                               6
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



models are naturally written in such a form; fermionic models may be brought to this form
using e.g. a Jordan Wigner transformation. We writeAas,

                                                                NAX
                                                         A=          ηkAk                                                       (21)
                                                                k=1
whereA             k is a Pauli string andη        k is the corresponding amplitude. For the special case of strings
of two Pauli matrices (the generalization to shorter or longer strings is straightforward),

                                                         Ak =Λ    akik Λbkjk                                                         (22)

whereΛ             ai  is thea       th  Pauli matrix (a=1  : X           i, a=2  : Y         i, a=3  : Z         i) applied on spini.
Hence, the integersa                 k,b k point to the type of Pauli matrices, andi        k,j k to the spin they apply
to.  The above decomposition is always possible since Pauli strings form a basis of the space
of operators.   However,  the appeal of this decomposition comes from the fact that for the
operators of interest to us, the number of termsN         A in the decomposition is polynomial (often
linear) inN.
     The rules to compute  ¯Afollow from the observation that,

                                       X j j′δj′kl =δ    jk′l′Xkk′Xll′
                                                   =δ    1−j,kl                                                                          (23)
                                        Yj j′δj′kl =δ    jk′l′Ykk′Xll′  =δ    jk′l′Xkk′Yll′
                                                   =i(−1)              lδ1−j,kl                                                                (24)
                                       Zj j′δj′kl =δ    jk′l′ Zkk′       =δ    jk′l′ Zll′
                                                   = (−1)        lδjkl                                                                 (25)

where we used Einstein summation convention. Again, these rules are best understood graph-
ically:


                                                                                                                               (26)


                                                                                                                               (27)


                                                                                                                               (28)


In other words, the rules are the following:  when we commute anXoperator withδwe get
twoXoperators (one on each side). On the other hand, when we commute aZoperator with
δ, we get a singleZoperator on the other side and we have the freedom to choose where we
place it.  SinceY=iX Z, when we commute aYoperator withδ, we get oneYand oneX
operator on the other side, with the freedom to choose where we place theY. An alternative
possibility for theZoperator is to write it as the square (Z=S                  2) of the "phase gate" 1   0     Sdefined
asS=        0  i     .  Upon commutingZwithδ, one obtains anSgate on each output leg of the
Kronecker tensor.
     Let us give a concrete example for our RTTψ   HV  =C    HVφHV .  Suppose we want to apply
the operator
                                             A=Z        1Z2 +Z    1Z6 +X    3 +X    1X2                                           (29)

                                                                  7
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



When we commuteZ                    1 withC          HV , we can decide to send it toA    1 or toA    12. Same withZ          6 which
we can send toA    6 orA     11. A possible choice for  ¯Ais therefore,

                                    ¯A=Z        1Z2 +Z    11Z12 +X    3X8 +X    1X2X9X12                                   (30)

but alternate choices that satisfy the equationAC=C                       ¯Aare also possible.  The above choice
has the advantage that it keeps a term local in the physical space also local in the replica space.

2.2.4RTT as an MPS with quantum error correction

The fourth way of viewing an RTT is to define it as the projection of an MPS on the logical
space of a quantum error correction code[35]. Indeed, if we define the stabilizers

                                                   Vja =Z    R j,a  ZR j,a+1                                                         (31)

then satisfying the constraintCamounts to enforcing

                                                   〈Ψ|V       ja|Ψ〉= +1                                                     (32)

for all the stabilizers. In other words, we can write the projectorC                    TCas,

                                                         NY|R  j|−1Y1+V      ja
                                              CTC=                     2     .                                               (33)
                                                        j=1   a=1

In the rest of this article, we will not explore the implications of this stabilizer formulation
further. However, it could be an interesting avenue for adapting the algorithms of this article
to actual quantum hardware.  Indeed, there exist efficient quantum circuits for constructing
any MPS as well as quantum circuits (using ancilla qubits) for measuring the stabilizers.

2.3Discussion of the expressivity and volume-law entanglement.

The expressivity of an MPS is directly linked to the value of its bond dimensions since for
a given sitea, the quantum entanglement entropy between the two subsystems defined by
i<aandi≥ais bounded byS≤logχ                                          a.   The way we order the tensors may also play
an important role[36].  More generally, for an arbitrary TT, the bond dimension controls the
amount of "correlations" that can be built between two TT sites; any correlation function must
decay exponentially with distance with a correlation "length"ξcontrolled byχ. In an RTT, the
presence of the replicas brings non-local correlations into the picture: they provide "shortcuts"
so that sites that are far away in the replica space become close in the physical space.  We
therefore have two routes to increase the expressivity of the RTT ansatz:  increase the bond
dimension and/or add new replicas.
    We argue that the RTT ansatz can harvest volume-law entanglement.   This point is in-
tuitively very clear:  by using enough (∼N/ξ) replicas, any physical site can be arbitrarily
correlated with any other physical site.   The statement can also be understood algorithmi-
cally:  if one tries to compress an RTT back into an MPS form using standard tools (writing
e.g. the constraints as rank 2 matrix product operators), one expects an exponential increase
of the bond dimension. A more formal proof of the assertion follows from previous results of
the literature.  Indeed, seeing the RTT as a nested MPS of MPS[see Eq. (11)]it follows that
"string bond states" are a particular case of RTT. Since these string bond states are themselves
a generalization of the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM)[24]and the RBM can exhibit
volume-law entanglement[37], it follows that RTT possesses this characteristic too.  In that
point of view, the replicas play the role of the hidden units in an RBM.


                                                             8
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



     In this article, we restrict ourselves to very specific paths[shown in Eqs. (54,55)], however,
many other paths can be considered depending on the entanglement structure of the targeted
quantum state. In the following, we explore how the RTT representation of volume-law states
can be learned using different algebraic methods, avoiding the gradient descent typically used
in volume-law ansätze such as RBMs and NQS.


3 Finding the ground-state with an RTT ansatz

In this section, we discuss our approach to find the ground-stateψ                           0 of a HamiltonianHusing
an RTT variational ansatz.  As we shall see, the technique is very peculiar:  the ground-state
can be constructed in a purely algebraic way without resorting to gradient descent (in contrast
to what is done in VMC). In that sense, the technique to find the ground-state is relatively close
to DMRG. On the other hand, in order to compute observables, we need to resort to sampling,
i.e. the method becomes stochastic. In that sense, the technique shares similarities with what
is usually done in VMC.
     Perhaps a good analogy is with quantum computers where the construction of the state is
purely deterministic through the application of a sequence of quantum gates. But in order to
measure anything, one needs to measure the qubits and the output becomes stochastic.
     We will design two distinct routes for obtaining the ground-state.  In the first, we work
purely in the replica space while in the second we work in the physical space. What we mean
by this statement is that in the first technique, we work directly on the objectφusing the
replica space Hamiltonian  ¯H.  In contrast, in the second technique, we work onψusing the
actual physical HamiltonianH.

3.1Optimization in the replica space

Our first approach is to use a variant of the power method to find the ground-state ofH.
Starting from an initial RTTψ   (0)    =Cφ       (0)   , we define

                                                 ψ(P)    = (1−τH)                Pψ(0)                                                   (34)

By construction (providedτis sufficiently small and the overlap ofψ                               (0)    withψ          0 is nonzero),
ψ(P)    converges to the ground-stateψ                           0,

                                                     ψ0 =limP→∞ ψ(P)                                                        (35)

We seek to representψ                    0 as an RTT, by using,

                                                       ψ(P)    =Cφ       (P)                                                          (36)

with,
                                                 φ(P) ≡(1−τ          ¯H)     Pφ(0)                                                    (37)
So far, the process is exact. However, in its naive implementation, the internal rankχofφ                   (P)
may increase very quickly withP.  The actual algorithm alternates the application of 1−τ               ¯H
with compression steps. Indeed, the underlying assumption of the overall approach is thatψ         0
can be approached very precisely with a small value ofχ.
     More precisely,φ  (P)    is created fromφ           (P−1)       using the following sequence,

    •compute the different contributionsη                               i ¯Hiφ(P−1)       for∀i∈{1...N                     ¯H}. The Pauli strings are
        MPOs with rank 1 so these MPO.MPS multiplications are straightforward and do not
        increase the rank.

                                                               9
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



    •sum the different terms together two by two.

    •compress the resulting sums to a targeted rankχ(see the algorithm in e.g. Section 5.3.1
       of Ref.[34]).

    •repeat the two preceding steps until all the terms are exhausted and one is left with a
       single TT. Multiply the result byτand subtract it fromφ                    (P−1)       to obtainφ               (P)   .

    In other words, the algorithm amounts to performing a form of Time-evolving block deci-
mation (TEBD) with the replica space Hamiltonian  ¯H. Other approaches are also possible. For
instance, one could try and run the DMRG algorithm on  ¯Husing an auto-MPO computation
followed by a regular DMRG computation leveraging the fact that ifφis an eigenstate of       ¯H
thenψ=Cφis an eigenstate ofH.  In our preliminary exploration, we have found that our
TEBD-like approach is effective and although it might be improved, the crucial point does not
lie there but in the choice of  ¯H. Indeed, as we have mentioned above, there are many different
choices of  ¯Hthat correspond to a singleH. While all are valid choices, the different TTφare
not all amenable to the same level of compression. We will experiment with different possible
choices in the next section.

3.2Optimization in the physical space

As we shall see, the preceding technique has some limitations in terms of precision in its current
form. The reason is that the algorithm works blindly: one does not compute the energy of the
state until the very end, so the effect of the compression on the energy is unknown and cannot
be mitigated.
    While the algorithm in the preceding subsection was close in spirit to the power method,
we now introduce an algorithm that resembles the Lanczos Krylov technique.  Letψbe our
current approximation of the ground-stateψ                           0 and letO  α be a set of operators. For instance, to
recover a variant of the Lanczos algorithm, we useO  α =H α−1     but we will consider also other
operators. By conventionO                        1 =1is the identity operator. The algorithm goes as follows. First,
we construct the productsψ      α =O αψ, by using     ¯Oα, as done in the replica space optimization.
Second, we seek the new approximation of the ground-stateψ       ′ in the form of an optimal linear
combination of these states,                              X
                                                   ψ′ =        cαψα.                                                      (38)
                                                            α
Because RTTs are by constructionnotnormalized, we also need to introduce the constraint that
the state has to be normalized.ψ       ′ is then the solution of the generalized eigenvalue problem

                                                      Hc=λSc,                                                          (39)

with the lowest eigenvalue.   The Hamiltonian matrixH     αβ  and the overlap matrixS     αβ  are
expressed in the reduced basis

                                                Hαβ    =ψ α† Hψ β                                                   (40)
                                                 Sαβ    =ψ α† ψβ,                                                    (41)

with the normalization enforced byc     †Sc=1, wherec= (c                       1c2...)represents the vector of the
coefficientsc        α. This small eigenvalue problem (we typically consider fewer than ten operators
Oα) is readily solved and it yields the new approximationψ         ′ of the ground-state.  If we wish
to continue with another optimization step, we turnψ   ′ back to an RTT form by summing the
TTsφ α. The finalφ   ′ can also be compressed.
    The important difference between this scheme and the one of the preceding section is
that we need to compute the matrix elementsH      αβ andS   αβ. These computations will involve

                                                           10
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



a stochastic approach.  Indeed, while in principle these matrix elements could be computed
through a direct contraction of the associated tensor network, it is unfeasible in practice as the
cost is exponential inN.  In the next section, we show how a simple adaptation of the varia-
tional Monte Carlo algorithm, which we call dual Monte Carlo (because it involves sampling
both|ψ    α|2 and|ψ   β|2), solves this problem.

3.3Dual Monte Carlo

The remaining problem is the following: given two RTTsψ  1 andψ        2, how can we compute the
matrix elementsψ                   1†Hψ    2 andψ        1†ψ2.  The following algorithm is actually very general and
does not require the states to be RTTs, it would work equally well for e.g.  neural quantum
states.  Although not widely spread, similar algorithms have already been developed in the
literature[38,39].
    Let us callZ       1 =ψ    1†ψ1 =Psψ1∗s ψ1s  andZ        2 =ψ    2†ψ2 the unknown norms of the corre-
sponding states.  Using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (e.g.  the Metropolis algorithm), we can
sample the probability distributionP                            s defined as,

                                                       P1         s|2
                                                        s  =|ψ 1Z1                                                            (42)

with a similar definition forP      2s . Hence, we can obtain the desired quantities by sampling over
P1 andP        2 but only up to the unknown normalization factorsZ              1 andZ        2.  To see how we can
get rid of these normalizations, let us first look at the matrix elements of the normalized states
                                ψ1†                                  X
                               pZ1H ψ2pZ2           =         1pZ1Z2      ψ1∗s Hs,  ¯sψ2¯s
                                                         vt      ﬁX¯s,s                ‚
                                                    =        Z1           1  Hs,  ¯sψ2       .                             (43)
                                                             Z2          ψ1s          ¯s
                                                                     ¯s                   P1s

where readers familiar with VMC will recognize inside the average〈···〉                 P1s  over the distribution
P1 a quantity similar to the local energy used in VMC. We shall call it amixed local energyas
both wavefunctions are involved in its calculation (in contrast to the standard VMC definition).
By multiplying the above equation with the same equation where the roles ofψ    1 andψ        2 are
reversed, we see that the normalization factor cancels out

                                           2    ›X                    •›X                        •
                        pψ1†    H ψ2p        =           1  Hs,  ¯sψ2              1   Hs,  ¯sψ1                       (44)
                            Z1        Z2                ψ1s          ¯s P1s       ψ2s          ¯s  P2s
                                                    ¯s                         ¯s

In other words, we need to performtwoMonte Carlo simulations to obtain the matrix element:
one samplingP                    1 and one samplingP                    2. The phase of the matrix element is recovered from the
phase of Eq.(43) since    pZ1/Z  2 is a real positive number.  The overlaps can be analogously
calculated by replacingH                      s,  ¯s withδ           s,  ¯s in the above equation yielding,

                                                       2      ψ1          ψ2
                                        pψ1†   pψ2        =       s           s      .                                      (45)
                                           Z1     Z2           ψ2s    P2s   ψ1s   P1s

    In our formulation of the generalized eigenvalue problem,  we shall not work with the





                                                            11
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission

















      Figure 2:  Example of theSmatrix computed with dual Monte Carlo before (left)
      and after (right) the orthogonalization procedure. The matrix was constructed when
      solving the Ising model in Fig.5. The new states are compressed toχ=2.


normalized states above, but directly with the unnormalized ones. To this end we define
                                                       ﬁX                     ‚
                                          ˜Hαβ    =             1  Hs,  ¯sψβ                                           (46)
                                                               ψαs          ¯s
                                                           ¯s                   Pαs
                                                       ﬁψβ     ‚
                                          ˜Sαβ    =          s                                                         (47)
                                                          ψαs    Pαs

which implies that we haveH   αβ  =Z α ˜Hαβ  =  ˜H†αβZβ  andS   αβ  =Z α˜Sαβ  = ˜S†αβZβ.  Dividing
each rowαof Eq.(39) byZ          α, we arrive at a new generalized eigenvalue problem

                                                        ˜Hc=λ    ˜Sc,                                                          (48)

expressed in terms of the un-symmetrized Hamiltonian matrix  ˜Hand the un-symmetrized
overlap matrix ˜S. The result of this problem is normalized as Pαβ c∗α˜Sαβ cβ =1, so the resulting
stateψ   ′  is not normalized.   However,  one can verify that the normalizations cancel in the
calculation of the energy so that the lowest generalized eigenvalueλ                       0  remains the actual
energy of the system.
                                                 E= 〈Ψ ′|H|Ψ  ′〉〈Ψ ′|Ψ′〉    =λ    0                                                  (49)

In practice,  we need to consider a slight modification of the above for numerical stability.
Indeed, as one proceeds to find the ground-state, all the statesψ    α will approachψ                    0, so that
the overlap matrixS     αβ  becomes almost singular:S      αβ ≈1∀α,βmaking the generalized
problem unstable. To solve this problem, we perform a stochastic generalization of the Gram-
Schmidt orthogonalization of the statesψ    α with respect toψ β∀β<α, so that we obtain an
approximately diagonal matrixS     αβ. We define the new statesψ   ′α  iteratively, as

                                          ψ′1  =ψ    1                                                                           (50) ψ2

                                          ψ′2  =ψ    2−      ψ1
                                                                    P1ψ1                                                    (51)
                                               ...

                                                           M−1X   ψM
                                         ψ′M  =ψ    M−              ψα
                                                            α=1            Pαψα,                                          (52)

                                                             12
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



whereMis the number of statesψ          α.  In practice, we have found that it is often sufficient to
re-orthogonalize with respect to the first vectorψ             1 only. As an example of a dual Monte Carlo
calculation, a matrixS     αβ before (left) and after (right) re-orthogonalization is shown in Fig.2.
    This concludes the general description of the algorithm. We note that although dual Monte
Carlo is very handy, it is not strictly speaking necessary: since the optimization performed on
thec  α is done on a handful of parameters, one could use a standard variational Monte Carlo
for this very small problem (a typical number we have used so far isM≤5).  The key aspect
of the physical optimization is our ability to select a handful of importantMdirections for
finding the ground-state (typically guided by the Hamiltonian), as opposed to using a gradient
on thousands or hundreds of thousands of parameters.


4 Application to the 2D transverse Ising model

We  now  turn  to  an  actual  calculation  to  illustrate  the  above  RTT  approach  on  a  practical
example.  We consider the transverse field Ising model with nearest-neighbor interactions on
a square lattice ofN=L×Lspins. The Hamiltonian is defined as,
                                                  X                 X
                                            H=         ZiZj−h    x      Xi,                                               (53)
                                                   〈i,j〉             i

where〈i,j〉represents the sum over all the nearest-neighbor pairs of sites. The interest in this
model stems from different aspects. First, as a function of the transverse magnetic fieldh          x the
model undergoes a quantum phase transition, from the paramagnetic to the antiferromagnetic
phase which breaks theZ       2 symmetry[40,41].  This is a paradigmatic example of a quantum
phase transition. The transition is furthermore accompanied by a classical phase transition at
finite temperature.  Second, these types of models have recently received a lot of interest in
the context of quantum annealing[42–44]. The quantum annealers based on Rydberg atoms,
in particular, are described by Eq. (53) with slightly longer range interactions. Third, we have
already established in a previous publication that String Bond States with very low rank are
extremely efficient ansätze for this model[28].  Since RTT generalizes String Bond States, it
follows that RTT must as well be very efficient for this problem.  Our goal below is merely
to illustrate the new algebraic approach described in the preceding section, we postpone the
study of more difficult models to future publications.

4.1Specification of the algorithm

To specify the algorithm entirely, we need to specify two things:  the path (i.e.  the function
σ(ω)) and the operatorsO           α.

4.1.1Specification of the algorithm

We use a path that first goes through all the sites column by column (Vfor Vertical), then line
by line (Hfor Horizontal), then diagonally (D), and then along the other diagonal (D    ′).
    More formally, we introduce the different pathsσ            V ,σ  H,σ  D andσ        D′ defined graphically
as,


                                                                                                 .                    (54)





                                                          13
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



The global pathσ(ω)of our RTT is

                                           σ=σ        HV DD′≡σ    V⊕σ    H⊕σ    D⊕σ    D′                                      (55)

It follows that for a given sitei,R          i1  is the TT index of this site in the horizontal ordering,R                    i2
corresponds toV,R         i3  toDandR                i4  toD ′.

4.1.2Definition of the operators in the physical space
Second, we need to define the operatorsO       α. We use only local operators that include at most
two Pauli matrices.  Our convention is the following:  we writeα= (A,B)whereAindicates
which Pauli matrix is concerned (for instanceA=Z Zfor product of twoZoperators andA=X
for a singleXoperator). For pairs of Pauli strings,Blabels the direction of the bond (V,H,D,
D′, possibly combinations such asV Hif both vertical and horizontal bonds are considered).
For instance, nearest neighbourZ Zoperators along the vertical direction are noted,
                                                               X
                                               OZ Z,V    =             Z(i  x,i  y)Z(i  x,i  y+1)                                              (56)
                                                            i=(i       x,i  y)

while along the diagonal direction, they are noted,
                                                            X
                                            OZ Z,D    =              Z(i  x,i  y)Z(i  x +1,i        y+1)    .                                        (57)
                                                          i=(i       x,i  y)

Likewise the transverse field operator reads,
                                                                   X
                                                       OX =                X(i  x,i  y)                                                   (58)
                                                                i=(i       x,i  y)

With these notations, the transverse field Ising Hamiltonian reads,

                                                H=O        Z Z,V    +O    Z Z,H −h    xOX .                                            (59)

4.1.3Definition of the operators in the replica space
Next, when we commute theZ       i operators with the Kronecker circuitC, we have several choices
for the definition of  ¯Oα i.e. we can decide where we move theZ       i operators. We use the notation
→CwhereC=V,H,D,D            ′ to indicate on which part of the RTT theZ       i are sent.  This is not
the most general choice, here we assume that all theZ       i operators of a given operator are sent
to the same part of the RTT. For instance, for the example of theO       Z Z,V    operator, we might
decide to send theZ       i to the vertical part of the path (this is the natural path that works best
in practice),                                                    X
                                             ¯OZ Z,V→V        =          ZRi,2 ZRi=(i      x ,i y +1),2                                           (60)

                                                              i=(i       x,i  y)
but we could also decide to send them to the diagonal part of the path,
                                             ¯OZ Z,V→D        =  X
                                                                         ZRi,3 ZRi=(i      x ,i y +1),3                                           (61)
                                                              i=(i       x,i  y)

There is no such freedom for theO       X  operator, so we simply have,
                                               ¯OX =      X
                                                                  XRi,1 XRi,2 XRi,3 XRi,4 .                                          (62)
                                                       i=(i       x,i  y)


                                                                   14
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission





















      Figure 3:  Error on the energy during a replica space optimization by application of
      (1−τ       ¯H)     P  for three choices of  ¯H, see text.  The number of active sub-MPS is one
      (blue), two (orange) and four (green). The optimization is purely algebraic but the
      calculation of the energy is performed using VMC sampling.   The parameters are
      hx =3,L=20,χ=2,τ=0.1 andα=0.08 for the                                          ¯HHV DD′ curve (green line).


Note that in these numerical experiments we limit ourselves to using operators in the replica
space that are obtained using the commutation rules derived earlier.  This is important for
replica space optimization to guarantee that the replica Hamiltonian has the same eigenstates
as the physical one. However, no such constraint exists for physical space optimization where
we may use any operator we want. This freedom may be used for e.g. optimizing a particular
tensorA              (i)   (or a pair of tensors) without resorting to gradient descent. Another remark is that
if all the operators contain onlyZ         i  Pauli matrices, then Dual Monte Carlo is not needed – a
single Monte Carlo simulation provides all the needed matrix elements (since all the different
states share the same probabilities).

4.2Replica space optimization

We now present the result of some numerical experiments where we apply the operator 1−τ      ¯H
iterativelyPtimes on an initially constant TTφ                              (0)    (φ  (0)i    =1∀i).  Importantly, the algorithm
to obtainφ               (P)    is perfectly deterministic. However, to obtain the physical observable (here the
energy), we need to resort to VMC stochastic sampling.  The results are shown in Fig.3for
hx =−3, a point very close to the quantum critical point[40,41], hence supposedly the most
difficult to compute.  The reference ground-state energyE/N=−3.18185±0.00004 for this
point was obtained using the Green Function Monte Carlo algorithm and a perceptrain ansatz
as discussed in[28]. We choose the smallest non-trivial rank for the RTT,χ=2. One should
keep in mind that tensor network calculations are typically performed with much higher ranks
in the hundreds or thousands. We use three different choices of  ¯H. The first is

                                       ¯HH =  ¯OZ Z,H→H        +  ¯OZ Z,V→H  −h    x ¯OX                                       (63)

This choice corresponds to sending all the operators to a single sub-MPS part of the RTT.
Therefore, it does not exploit the full freedom of the RTT but rather works as a regular MPS.
We find that the error barely decreases to an errorδE/E≈6×10         −2   consistent with what one
obtains with a regular MPS for such a small rank. The situation improves drastically when one
sends the different interaction terms to the parts of the RTT where they are local, i.e.  when


                                                            15
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission





















      Figure 4:  Error on the energy after a replica space optimization versus system size
      L. The number of active sub-MPS is one (blue), two (orange) and four (green), see
      text. The accuracy of the RTT is robust with respect to system size. Same parameters
      as in Fig.3.


we use,
                                     ¯HHV =  ¯OZ Z,H→H        +  ¯OZ Z,V→V  −h    x ¯OX .                                     (64)

We find that the error drops by more than one order of magnitude reachingδE/E≈3×10           −3  ,
an error level where the physics of the ansatz is qualitatively correct.  It is still possible to
improve on these results in a variational manner in order to take advantage of the diagonal
parts of the RTTDandD    ′. For instance, if we add one more operator with a parameterα,

                                 ¯HHV DD′ =  ¯HHV +α   ¯OZ Z,D→D        +  ¯OZ Z,D ′→D ′ ,                               (65)

we find that the error reachesδE/E≈10         −3   for the optimum choice of the parameterα=0.08.
In the various experiments that we have performed, we have found that the curves shown in
Fig.3are very generic: the descent is fast, robust and independent of the initial state or choice
of metaparameters.  The error levels that we have achieved are consistent with those found
using VMC and gradient descent using the technique described in[28]for, respectively,K=1
(MPS level),K=2 (two subparts of the RTT are active) andK=4 (the diagonal parts are
also active). The advantage of the present approach is that we bypass entirely the non-convex
optimization problem. We have also checked that the method works robustly across different
system sizes in Fig.4where we observe that the error barely increases while going from a 6×6
system to a 20×20 one.  For the         ¯HHV DD′ replica space Hamiltonian, the valueα=0.08 was
found to be close to optimum across the three system sizes.

4.3Physical space optimization

We now turn to physical space optimization using the dual Monte Carlo technique.  We start
from the RTTψobtained using replica space optimization with the       ¯HHV replica space Hamil-
tonian Eq.(63) and seek the best linear combination Eq.(38) using certain operators. Based on
the results of the replica space optimization, we expect the important operators to be those that
involve the diagonal part of the RTT but we will work in an agnostic way to see how the method
works in practice. We will use 4 operators: identity,  ¯OX ,  ¯OZ Z,HV    =  ¯OZ Z,H→H        +  ¯OZ Z,V→V       , and
¯OZ Z,DD ′ =  ¯OZ Z,D→D        +  ¯OZ Z,D ′→D ′.  The results are shown in Table1for various choices of the
operators included in the calculation.  We find an improvement (of the same order as in the


                                                           16
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission




















      Figure 5:  Dual Monte Carlo optimization steps starting from the solution of  ¯HHV
      (star). At each step, Eq. (48) is solved. The eigenvalues of the equation (arrows) are
      compared with the actual energies of the state after the compression (points).


replica space optimization when we considered the  ¯HHV DD′ replica space Hamiltonian) when-
ever the diagonal operator  ¯OZ Z,DD ′ was included. The main difference with replica space op-
timization is that in the physical space optimization, we can only improve the energy since we
are building, by construction, the best linear combination of the different orbitals. We checked
explicitly that the accuracy was not affected by the final compression used to put the linear
combination back into an RTT form.  Table1also includes the rescaled variance of energy, a
quantity known as the V-score[45].
    The above approach could be extended in various ways by considering more operators. For
instance using powers of  ¯H, we can build a Lanczos-like method. We could also add operators
that favor a given phase (say a staggering operator for the antiferromagnetic phase). We leave
the associated explorations to further studies.
    Fig.5shows different steps of the physical space optimization process.  We observe that
the convergence happens within a handful of iterations. Also, the eigenvalues of the general-
ized eigenproblem almost coincide with the result of the Dual Monte Carlo calculation which
indicates that the compression performed after solving the linear system does not significantly
alter the state.
    Fig.6shows the error obtained using the same optimization as in Table1for a span of
theh       x  values in the paramagnetic region of the phase diagram.   We find that the error is
consistently belowδE/E≈10        −3  .  We did not study the antiferromagnetic side of the phase


      Table 1:   Energy and energy variance after the physical space optimization.  The×
      indicate which operators have been included. The starting point is the replica space
      optimization using the  ¯HHV replica space Hamiltonian. The reference energy for this
      point isE/N=−3.169946±0.00004. The parameters areh                                                   x =3,L=10 andχ=2

                               ¯OZ Z,HV        ¯OZ Z,DD ′      ¯OX     E/N          Nvar/E                  2
                               ×    ×                    -3.1682    0.0013
                               ×    ×    ×    -3.1682    0.0013
                               ×        ×    -3.163      0.005
                                            ×    ×    -3.1682    0.0013
                                                                 -3.163      0.005



                                                           17
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission





















      Figure 6:  Error ofχ=2 RTT versush                         x  in the paramagnetic region of the phase
      diagram.  The parameters and optimization procedure are the same as in Table1:
      (solid line) replica space optimization using  ¯HHV , followed by (dashed line) phys-
      ical  space  optimization  using   ¯OZ Z,DD ′.   The  error  is  estimated  using  the  V-score,
      δE/E≈0.2Nvar[H]/E                                          2, see Ref.[28]


diagram which, we surmise, would require the introduction of operators that explicitly break
translational symmetry since we expect a boundary phase transition before the bulk one[46].
An interesting feature of Fig.6is a relatively large gain in precision obtained in the presence
of the diagonal operator  ¯OZ Z,DD ′ aroundh                x  =4.  We attribute this feature to the increase of
the antiferromagnetic correlation length as one decreasesh                     x: at some point it becomes large
enough for the presence of the diagonal correlations to play a significant role.  Loweringh                    x
further, one would need to add more orderings and/or increase the bond dimension to keep
up with the increasingly long-range correlations that build in the system.


5 Conclusions

In this work we have introduced a variational ansatz, the Replica Tensor Train, that naturally
extends a class of previously discussed powerful ansätze[22–24,28].  Our chief result is that
RTT has an internal structure that provides the possibility to build the ground-state of a Hamil-
tonian directly without resorting to gradient descent. We have shown a proof of principle that
the method works for the 2D Ising model with transverse field, obtaining a very good accuracy
while using a minimal bond dimensionχ=2.
    This article opens more new questions than it answers and much more work is needed.
The most urgent question is whether the set of new techniques will be efficient to solve more
difficult models, notably models with sign problems. Indeed, while VMC is immune to the sign
problem, we do not yet have a general approach tolearn the sign. The hope is that ourglobal
operator based approach will not suffer from the same limitations aslocalgradient descent.
One could also envision combining the two approaches.  While we focused on ground-state
search, the dynamics, within the time-dependent variational principle framework should also
be directly in scope of the operator approach (in either replica and/or physical space). On the
technical ground, one needs to study how the quality of the ansatz can be controlled using e.g.
higher ranks, more complex paths, more operators and possibly meta algorithms that choose
the best combination dynamically. Last, variants of the RTT-based techniques compatible with
quantum hardware could also be constructed.


                                                          18
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission


Acknowledgements

MS would like to thank Antoine Georges’ group at Collège de France for hosting him during
his stay in Paris.

Author  contributionsMS  wrote  the  code  and  performed  the  simulations.   MS,  GG  and
XW contributed to the mathematical concepts, algorithms, data analysis and writing of the
manuscript. XW supervised the project.

Funding informationWe acknowledge the Plan France 2030 ANR-22-PETQ-0007 “EPIQ”,
the PEPR “EQUBITFLY”, the ANR “DADI” and the CEA-FZJ French-German project AIDAS for
the funding.


References

 [1]S. R. White,Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups,  Physical
       Review Letters69(19), 2863 (1992), doi:10.1103/physrevlett.69.2863.

 [2]S. R. White and R. M. Noack,Real-space quantum renormalization groups,   Physical
       Review Letters68(24), 3487 (1992), doi:10.1103/physrevlett.68.3487.

 [3]M.  B.  Hastings,An  area  law  for  one-dimensional  quantum  systems,    J.  Stat.  Mech.
       2007(08), P08024 (2007), doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2007/08/P08024.

 [4]J. I. Cirac, D. Pérez-García, N. Schuch and F. Verstraete,Matrix product states and pro-
       jected  entangled  pair  states:  Concepts,  symmetries,  theorems,   Rev.  Mod.  Phys.93(4),
       045003 (2021), doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.93.045003.

 [5]G. Scarpa, A. Molnár, Y. Ge, J. J. García-Ripoll, N. Schuch, D. Pérez-García and S. Iblisdir,
       Projected Entangled Pair States: Fundamental Analytical and Numerical Limitations, Phys.
       Rev. Lett.125(21), 210504 (2020), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.210504.

 [6]S. Sorella,Green Function Monte Carlo with Stochastic Reconfiguration,  Physical Review
       Letters80(20), 4558 (1998), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.4558.

 [7]S.  Sorella  and  L.  Capriotti,Green  function  monte  carlo  with  stochastic  reconfigura-
       tion:  An effective remedy for the sign problem,  Physical Review B61(4), 2599 (2000),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.61.2599.

 [8]M.  Casula  and  S.  Sorella,Geminal  wavefunctions  with  Jastrow  correlation:   a  first
       application  to  atoms,      The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics119(13),   6500  (2003),
       doi:10.1063/1.1604379.

 [9]G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural
       networks, Science355(6325), 602 (2017), doi:10.1126/science.aag2302.

[10]Y. Nomura, A. S. Darmawan, Y. Yamaji and M. Imada,Restricted Boltzmann machine learn-
       ing for solving strongly correlated quantum systems,  Physical Review B96(20), 205152
       (2017), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.205152.

[11]F.  Vicentini,  A.  Biella,  N.  Regnault  and  C.  Ciuti,Variational  Neural-Network  Ansatz
       for Steady States in Open Quantum Systems,  Physical Review Letters122(25), 250503
       (2019), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.250503.

                                                        19
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



[12]K.  Choo,  T.  Neupert  and  G.  Carleo,Two-dimensional  frustrated  J                         1-J2  model  studied
       with  neural  network  quantum  states,    Physical  Review  B100(12),  125124  (2019),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.125124.

[13]M.  Hibat-Allah,  M.  Ganahl,  L.  E.  Hayward,  R.  G.  Melko  and  J.  Carrasquilla,Recur-
       rent neural network wave functions,   Physical Review Research2(2),  023358 (2020),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023358.

[14]A. Lovato, C. Adams, G. Carleo and N. Rocco,Hidden-nucleons neural-network quantum
       states for the nuclear many-body problem, Physical Review Research4(4), 043178 (2022),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.043178.

[15]J. Robledo Moreno, G. Carleo, A. Georges and J. Stokes,Fermionic wave functions from
       neural-network constrained hidden states,  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
       ences119(32), e2122059119 (2022), doi:10.1073/pnas.2122059119.

[16]O.  Sharir,  A.  Shashua  and  G.  Carleo,Neural  tensor  contractions  and  the  expres-
       sive  power  of  deep  neural  quantum  states,    Phys.  Rev.  B106(20),  205136  (2022),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.106.205136.

[17]J.   Kim,   G.   Pescia,   B.   Fore,   J.   Nys,   G.   Carleo,   S.   Gandolfi,   M.   Hjorth-Jensen
       and   A.   Lovato,Neural-network   quantum   states   for   ultra-cold   Fermi   gases,
       doi:10.48550/arXiv.2305.08831(2023).

[18]C. Roth, A. Szabo and A. MacDonald,High-accuracy variational Monte Carlo for frus-
       trated magnets with deep neural networks,  Physical Review B108(5), 054410 (2023),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.108.054410.

[19]W.-Y. Liu, Y.-Z. Huang, S.-S. Gong and Z.-C. Gu,Accurate simulation for finite projected
       entangled pair states in two dimensions,   Physical Review B103(23), 235155 (2021),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.103.235155.

[20]W.-Y.  Liu,  S.-J.  Du,  R.  Peng,  J.  Gray  and  G.  K.-L.  Chan,Tensor  Network  Computa-
       tions  That  Capture  Strict  Variationality,  Volume  Law  Behavior,  and  the  Efficient  Rep-
       resentation  of  Neural  Network  States,     Phys.  Rev.  Lett.133(26),  260404  (2024),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.260404.

[21]J.  Naumann,  E.  L.  Weerda,  M.  Rizzi,  J.  Eisert  and  P.  Schmoll,An  introduction
       to  infinite  projected  entangled-pair  state  methods  for  variational  ground  state  simula-
       tions  using  automatic  differentiation,    SciPost  Physics  Lecture  Notes  p.  086  (2024),
       doi:10.21468/SciPostPhysLectNotes.86.

[22]N. Schuch, M. M. Wolf, F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac,Strings, Projected Entangled Pair
       States, and variational Monte Carlo methods,  Physical Review Letters100(4), 040501
       (2008), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.040501.

[23]A. Sfondrini, J. Cerrillo, N. Schuch and J. I. Cirac,Simulating two- and three-dimensional
       frustrated quantum systems with string-bond states,  Physical Review B81(21), 214426
       (2010), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.81.214426.

[24]I. Glasser, N. Pancotti, M. August, I. D. Rodriguez and J. I. Cirac,Neural-Network Quan-
       tum States, String-Bond States, and Chiral Topological States,   Physical Review X8(1),
       011006 (2018), doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.8.011006.

[25]G. Lami, G. Carleo and M. Collura,Matrix product states with backflow correlations, Phys.
       Rev. B106(8), L081111 (2022), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.106.L081111.

                                                          20
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



[26]M. Wang, Y. Pan, Z. Xu, X. Yang, G. Li and A. Cichocki,Tensor Networks Meet Neural
       Networks: A Survey and Future Perspectives(2023).

[27]D.  Wu,  R.  Rossi,  F.  Vicentini  and  G.  Carleo,From  tensor-network  quantum  states
       to  tensorial  recurrent  neural  networks,      Phys.  Rev.  Res.5(3),   L032001  (2023),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.5.L032001.

[28]M. Srdinšek and X. Waintal,Hybrid between biologically and quantum-inspired many-body
       states, Phys. Rev. B113(12), 125107 (2026), doi:10.1103/b2kz-15c5.

[29]X. Liang, S.-J. Dong and L. He,Hybrid convolutional neural network and projected en-
       tangled pair states wave functions for quantum many-particle states, Phys. Rev. B103(3),
       035138 (2021), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.103.035138.

[30]S.-J. Du, A. Chen and G. K.-L. Chan,Neuralized Fermionic Tensor Networks for Quantum
       Many-Body Systems, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2506.08329(2025).

[31]D.-W. Qu, Q. Li, S.-S. Gong, Y. Qi, W. Li and G. Su,Phase Diagram, $d$-Wave Super-
       conductivity, and Pseudogap of the $t\ensuremath{-}{t}^{\ensuremath{’}}\ensuremath{-
       }J$   Model   at   Finite   Temperature,       Phys.   Rev.   Lett.133(25),   256003   (2024),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.256003.

[32]H. Xu, C.-M. Chung, M. Qin, U. Schollwöck, S. R. White and S. Zhang,Coexistence of
       superconductivity with partially filled stripes in the Hubbard model,  Science384(6696),
       adh7691 (2024), doi:10.1126/science.adh7691.

[33]C. Roth, A. Chen, A. Sengupta and A. Georges,Superconductivity in the two-dimensional
       Hubbard  model  revealed  by  neural  quantum  states,    doi:10.48550/arXiv.2511.07566
       (2025).

[34]X.  Waintal,  C.-H.  Huang  and  C.  W.  Groth,Who  can  compete  with  quantum  com-
       puters?   Lecture  notes  on  quantum  inspired  tensor  networks  computational  techniques,
       doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.03035(2026).

[35]M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang,Quantum computation and quantum information,  Cam-
       bridge Univ. Press, 10th anniversary ed edn., ISBN 978-1-107-00217-3 (2010).

[36]G. Moritz, B. A. Hess and M. Reiher,Convergence behavior of the density-matrix renormal-
       ization group algorithm for optimized orbital orderings,  J. Chem. Phys.122(2), 024107
       (2004), doi:10.1063/1.1824891.

[37]D.-L. Deng, X. Li and S. Das Sarma,Quantum entanglement in neural network states,
       Phys. Rev. X7, 021021 (2017), doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.7.021021.

[38]M. P. Nightingale and V. Melik-Alaverdian,Optimization of Ground- and Excited-State
       Wave  Functions  and  van  der  Waals  Clusters,   Phys.  Rev.  Lett.87(4),  043401  (2001),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.043401.

[39]C. J. Umrigar,  J. Toulouse,  C. Filippi,  S. Sorella and R. G. Hennig,Alleviation of the
       Fermion-Sign Problem by Optimization of Many-Body Wave Functions,   Phys. Rev. Lett.
       98(11), 110201 (2007), doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.110201.

[40]R.  J.  Webber  and  M.  Lindsey,    Rayleigh-Gauss-Newton  optimization  with  enhanced
       sampling  for  variational  Monte  Carlo,     Phys.  Rev.  Research4(3),  033099  (2022),
       doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.033099.


                                                         21
  SciPost Physics                                                                                  Submission



[41]P. M. Vecsei, J. L. Lado and C. Flindt,Lee-Yang theory of the two-dimensional quantum
       Ising model, Phys. Rev. B106(5), 054402 (2022), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.106.054402.

[42]P. Scholl, M. Schuler, H. J. Williams, A. A. Eberharter, D. Barredo, K.-N. Schymik, V. Lien-
       hard, L.-P. Henry, T. C. Lang, T. Lahaye, A. M. Läuchli and A. Browaeys,Quantum sim-
       ulation of 2D antiferromagnets with hundreds of Rydberg atoms,  Nature595(7866), 233
       (2021), doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03585-1.

[43]S.  Ebadi,  T.  T.  Wang,  H.  Levine,  A.  Keesling,  G.  Semeghini,  A.  Omran,  D.  Bluvstein,
       R. Samajdar, H. Pichler, W. W. Ho, S. Choi, S. Sachdevet al., Quantum Phases of Mat-
       ter on a 256-Atom Programmable Quantum Simulator,  Nature595(7866), 227 (2021),
       doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03582-4.

[44]C. Chen, G. Bornet, M. Bintz, G. Emperauger, L. Leclerc, V. S. Liu, P. Scholl, D. Barredo,
       J.  Hauschild,  S.  Chatterjee,  M.  Schuler,  A.  M.  Läuchliet  al.,    Continuous  symme-
       try  breaking  in  a  two-dimensional  Rydberg  array,    Nature616(7958),  691  (2023),
       doi:10.1038/s41586-023-05859-2.

[45]D.  Wu,  R.  Rossi,  F.  Vicentini,  N.  Astrakhantsev,  F.  Becca,  X.  Cao,  J.  Carrasquilla,
       F.  Ferrari,  A.  Georges,  M.  Hibat-Allah,  M.  Imada,  A.  M.  Läuchliet  al.,     Varia-
       tional benchmarks for quantum many-body problems,  Science386(6719), 296 (2024),
       doi:10.1126/science.adg9774.

[46]M. Kalinowski, R. Samajdar, R. G. Melko, M. D. Lukin, S. Sachdev and S. Choi,Bulk
       and boundary quantum phase transitions in a square Rydberg atom array,  Phys. Rev. B
       105(17), 174417 (2022), doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.105.174417.




































                                                         22