    GRAPHNETZ: Statistical Benchmarking of Graph
         Neural Networks with Paired Tests and Rank
                                             Aggregation




                   Kleyton da Costa∗                                   Bernardo Modenesi
                        Holistic AI                                     University of Utah
                       London, UK                                    Salt Lake City, UT, USA
              kleyton.vsc@gmail.com                            bernardo.modenesi@utah.edu



                 Code:github.com/quant-sci/graphnetz•  Docs:graphnetz.readthedocs.io

                                                    Abstract

          Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) benchmarks often report single point estimates,
          even when performance differences are small relative to variation across random
          seeds, train/test splits, and datasets.  Confidence intervals, paired comparisons,
          multiple-comparison correction, and rank-based aggregation are standard statistical
          tools, but they are rarely the default output of graph-learning benchmark suites.
          We introduceGRAPHNETZ, a benchmarking framework whose default output
          is a structured statistical report rather than a raw accuracy table.GRAPHNETZ
          currently includes 63 dataset loaders, four task types, and five canonical GNN
          architectures, while also supporting custom datasets and models. The framework
          standardizes multi-seed evaluation and automatically returns per-cell confidence
          intervals, Holm-corrected paired tests, and Friedman–Nemenyi critical-difference
          diagrams across tasks. In a cross-category benchmark over ten heterogeneous tasks,
          apparent rank differences among four canonical node-level encoders fall within a
          single Nemenyi clique, indicating that none is significantly better than the others
          atα= 0.05      . GRAPHNETZtherefore provides researchers with a reproducible
          computational and statistical pipeline to benchmark new graph-learning methods
          against standard architectures, over different tasks and a wide set of applications,
          while reporting principled statistical evidence for benchmarking which accounts
          for seed uncertainty. This framework is set to serve the graph-learning community
          with a reproducible and honest model comparison ready to be added to papers.

1    Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are now the default tool for problems as diverse as molecular property
prediction,  citation  analysis,  social  network  mining,  anti-money  laundering,  and  combinatorial
optimization.   However,  a typical benchmarking paper in this area trains a few models on few
datasets, reports a single test accuracy (plus standard deviation) per cell, and concludes that one
model “outperforms” another. Headline differences are reported without confidence intervals, paired
comparisons,  multiple-comparison  correction,  or  rank-based  aggregation  across  datasets.   This
behavior can be viewed as a symptom of the recent reproducibility crises in artificial intelligence in
general [Hutson,2018] and graph learning in specifics [Bechler-Speicher et al.,2025]. The result is a
literature whose effect sizes are routinely smaller than the noise from which they are extracted, and
can produce negative implications for the relevance of the field.

   ∗Corresponding author.


Preprint. Under review.
Two well-known re-evaluations established this concretely. Shchur et al.[2018] showed that the
headline differences between GCN, GAT, and GraphSAGE on the Planetoid splits collapse once the
seed and split are randomized;Errica et al.[2020] reached the same conclusion for graph classification
under a fair hyperparameter search, tracing much of the literature’s reported “progress” to evaluation
artifacts rather than architectural gains. Both works argue, in effect, that the right statistical apparatus
must be embedded in the default pipeline, not bolted on by careful authors.
Using multi-seed Student’st confidence intervals, pairedt-tests (and their non-parametric Wilcoxon
signed-rank alternatives) with Holm-Bonferroni correction [Holm,1979], and rank-based aggregation
with the Friedman omnibus and Nemenyi post-hoc, visualized as a critical-difference (CD) dia-
gram [Demšar,2006], is half a century old and well understood. Nothing prevents a GNN practitioner
from applying it; what is missing is a default surface that produces it without bespoke statistics code.

Where the existing tooling stops.PyTorch (PyG) [Fey and Lenssen,2019] is the main layer
library for GNN research, exposing message-passing primitives and a broad collection of dataset
loaders, and metrics.  The library is deliberatelyarchitecture-firstand leave training loops, multi-
seed orchestration, and statistical reporting to the user.  The major benchmark suites:  the Open
Graph Benchmark [Hu et al.,2020], Benchmarking-GNNs [Dwivedi et al.,2020], and the recent
GraphBench [Stoll et al.,2025]                    2. None of them makes per-cell CIs, multiple-comparison-corrected
pairwise tests, or critical-difference diagrams the default return type of a benchmark run.  Table1
summarizes this gap.

Our position.Statistical rigor in GNN benchmarking is both a tooling problem and a reproducibility
one. If multi-seed, multiple-comparison-corrected, rank-aggregated reporting were the default surface
of the dominant benchmarking framework, every benchmark paper would inherit it for free.  We
introduceGRAPHNETZ,  a benchmarking framework for the graph-learning community,  whose
default output is a structured statistical report rather than a raw accuracy table, utilizing a wide set of
applications and state-of-the-art graph-learning models for a thorough and honest model comparison.
This not only streamlines the benchmark process with a clear and reproducible pipeline, but also
mitigatescherry-pickingconcerns, comparing competing GNN methods to existing ones in a wide
cast of scenarios, while accounting for seed uncertainty. To our knowledge,GRAPHNETZis the first
GNN-focused benchmarking framework to make the full chain the default output of a benchmark run.
Our main contributions include:

        •  A categorical dataset taxonomy that maps 63 loaders to ten research areas (combinatorial
           optimization, biology, social, knowledge, infrastructure, finance, computing, vision, physics,
           and security), with explicit notes on subtopics that lack canonical public benchmarks;
        •  A uniform benchmark protocol for five of the most used GNN architectures (GCN, GAT,
           GIN, GraphSAGE, Graph Transformer) across four task types (node classification, graph
           classification, graph regression, link prediction) so that differences in reported performance
           reflect modeling choices rather than evaluation idiosyncrasies;
        •  A statistically principled reporting layer, mean± Student’st CI per cell, Holm–Bonferroni-
           corrected pairedt-tests within tasks, and Friedman-Nemenyi critical-difference diagrams
           across tasks, formally defined in the AppendixAand instantiated as the default return type
           of every benchmark run;
        •  A cross-category empirical illustration of the full pipeline (Section3) showing that with
           N= 10    heterogeneous tasks under a uniform held-out-metric protocol, none of the four
           node-level encoders is significantly better than any other atα= 0.05       — all four fall within
           a single Nemenyi clique (CD 0.05   = 1.48);

This paper is organized as follows: Section2describes theGRAPHNETZevaluation protocol and
states it formally as Algorithm1. Section3runs the cross-category benchmark and reports its results.
Sections4discuss the findings and limitations of the framework. The formal statistical machinery
(Student’st CI, paired-t with Holm correction, Friedman–NemenyiCD) is collected in AppendixA.


    2The paper extends task coverage to node-level, edge-level, graph-level, and generative settings with out-of-
distribution splits and unified hyperparameter tuning


                                                             2
                                   Figure    1:   TheGRAPHNETZ  evaluation    protocol.Top: the    processing    pipeline    Cata-
                                   log→ Encoders→ Training→ Statistical  layerR;  arrows  carry  the  data  axes  –  a  (task t, data)  pair,  a
                                   modelm, and the seed-paired metric tensorX[t,m,s]      . The dashed arc on Training marks the multi-seed inner
                                   loop that builds the seed axis ofX.Bottom:the three artifacts the framework emits by default – per-cell mean
                                   with Student’st confidence interval, a Holm-corrected pairwisep-value matrix, and a Demšar critical-difference
                                   diagram whose horizontal bar joins models within the Nemenyi thresholdCD.

                                   Algorithm 1GRAPHNETZbenchmark protocol.
                                   Require:categoryC, modelsM, seedsS, epochsE, levelα
                                   Ensure:structured statistical reportR
                                    1:T ←TASKS(C)                       ▷representative datasets and tasks forC
                                    2:X←∅              ▷tensor of per-seed final metrics indexed by (task, model, seed)
                                    3:foreach taskt∈Tdo
                                    4:     foreach modelm∈Mcompatible withTASK(t)do
                                    5:           foreach seeds∈Sdo
                                    6:                 seed all RNGs withs; instantiatemwith task-appropriate dimensions
                                    7:                 trainmontforEepochs; record final metricX[t,m,s]
                                    8:           end for
                                    9:     end for
                                   10:end for
                                   11:Per-cell:compute¯x              t,m andh   t,m at levelαfromX                                     pairs and apply Holm–
                                   12:  Per-task pairwise:for each       t, compute paired-tp-values for all |Mt|2
                                        Bonferroni
                                   13:Across-task:rank models per task, compute Friedmanχ                                      2F  and NemenyiCD α
                                   14:returnR= (X,¯x,h,˜p,¯r,CD            α)


                                   2    The GRAPHNETZEvaluation Protocol

                                   GRAPHNETZis organized around four conceptual layers:  a categorized catalog of datasets, a setseed loop
                                   of model evaluations under a common protocol, training routines covering the standard task types,
       Catalog             (t,k)   and the statistical reporting layer (formal definitions in AppendixEncodersmTrainingX[t,m,s]Statistical layerRA). Figure1is the schematic. The
       63 loaders                  Algorithm1formally states the same pipeline.5 architecturesSseeds×Eepochs   t-CI  /  Holm  /  CD
10 categories·4 task types               + task adapters                     Adam, paired
                                   Datasets.The catalog spans ten categories and is indexed by acategory     × tasktaxonomy: each
                                   loader declares the tasks it can serve, so the same dataset can appear in more than one task (Cora,
                                   CiteSeer and PubMed, for example, are exposed as both node-classification and link-prediction
                                   tasks  via  PyG’s RandomLinkSplit).   The  taxonomy  is  materialized  at  module  import  time  as
                                   LOADER_REGISTRY[category][task],  and  the  curated  benchmark  mirrors  the  same  shape  as
                                   BENCHMARK_TASKS[category][task]. Where canonical public benchmarks exist (Planetoid [SenGCNGAT
                                                          1                                       SAGE     GT
              ¯x                                          2
                                                          3                              1     2    33    4     5
                                                          4
                                                            1  2  3  4                CD0.05   =1.48

                  per-cell mean±t-CI                    pairwise Holmp                   Demšar CD diagram
                                     Table 1:Positioning ofGRAPHNETZagainst related GNN benchmarking frameworks.Coveragecounts built-it
                                     loaders and architectures (“open” = user-supplied; “N + open” =N built-ins plus a one-line extension API).
                                     Statistical layerflags whether the default report emits per-cell CIs (   t = Student’s-t,std= raw stdev), corrected
                                     pairwise tests, a Friedman–Nemenyi CD diagram, and a bootstrap CI option.Extensibility & reproducibility
                                     flag a one-line custom-dataset / custom-model API and automatic per-(task, model, seed)RNG reseeding.       ✓ =
                                     first-class; – = unsupported;partial= available but not default. Counts reflect each framework’s reference paper.









                                     et al.,2008], TUDataset [Morris et al.,2020], QM9, ZINC, ModelNet, ShapeNet, Elliptic Bitcoin [We-
                                     ber et al.,2019], MalNet [Freitas et al.,2021], the Long-Range graph benchmark Peptides [Dwivedi
                                     et al.,2022], and the Heterophilous graph benchmark [Platonov et al.,2023]), they are wrapped
                                     directly. Otherwise we draw from the Netzschleuder catalog [Peixoto,2020] or generate synthetic
                                     instances (TSP, VRP, max-flow, bipartite matching, graph coloring, Ising lattice). Table4summarizes
                                     the loaders per category.

                                     Models.The  framework  evaluates  five  architectures:   GCN  [Kipf  and  Welling, 2017],  GAT
                                     [Veli  ˇckovi´c  et  al.,2018],  GIN  [Xu  et  al.,2019],  GraphSAGE  [Hamilton  et  al.,2017],  and  the
                                     Graph Transformer [Shi et al.,2021]. Two task adapters, a graph-level pooling head over a node-level
                                     encoder and a dot-product link-prediction head, let the four node-level encoders enter every task in the
                                     benchmark (node classification, graph classification, graph regression, link prediction). GIN keeps its
                                     native graph-level pooling and is evaluated on the two graph-level. Task compatibility is checked
                                     before training, so incompatible (model, task) pairs are skipped automatically (Algorithm1, line 4).
                                     Deep Graph Infomax [Veli  ˇckovi´c et al.,2019] is exposed as an optionaltraining utility(                                  train_dgi
                                    + DGIWrapper) rather than a benchmark-task model: it is a self-supervised training objective whose
                                    “metric” is its own loss, so it cannot serve as a held-out test metric in the same row of the report as
                                     node-classification accuracy or link-prediction AUC.

                                     Training.   Five training routines cover the four tasks plus a self-supervised pre-training utility:
                                     node classification, graph classification, graph regression, link prediction (binary cross-entropy on
                                     a RandomLinkSplit with negative sampling, evaluated by ROC-AUC), and an optional DGI pre-
                                     training step that returns an unsupervised representation but is excluded from the default benchmark
                                     report because its loss is not a held-out metric. Each emits per-epoch metrics that feed the reporting
                                     layer (AppendixA).

                                     Programmatic   interface.The   algorithm1 is   exposed   through   a   single   entry   point,
                                     run_benchmark, that takes a category (or an explicit list of Task objects), a mapping from model
                                     names to model classes, a seed list, and an optional task filter; it returns a BenchmarkReport whose
                                     methods produce the artifacts of Figure1. The same report object supports both the curated catalog
                                     and any user-defined task list (AppendixC), so reviewers can reproduce the cells in this paper and
                                     extend the analysis with their own architectures or datasets without touching the internals of the
                                     framework.

                                     Positioning.   Table1summarizes howGRAPHNETZdiffers from the closest related frameworks.
                                     The distinguishing axis is not architectural breadth or dataset count, but the presence of an out-of-the-
                                     box statistical reporting layer.

                                     3    Cross-Category Experiment

                                     3.1    Protocol

                                    We pick one representative dataset from each of the ten research categories and run the benchmark
                                     once per category with five architectures (GCN, GAT, GraphSAGE, Graph Transformer, GIN). The


                                                                                                        4

                                                    Coverage              Statistical layer (default report)   Extensibility (1-line API)   Repro.
Framework                                                 Data           Models      CI   Pairwise   CD   Bootstrap   Dataset        Model        Reseed
PyTorch Geometric [Fey and Lenssen,2019]        many           many        –        –        –         –         open           open             –
Open Graph Benchmark [Hu et al.,2020]             15+             open       std       –        –         –         open           open             –
Benchmarking-GNNs [Dwivedi et al.,2020]           8                 6         std       –        –         –         open           open          partial
GraphBench [Stoll et al.,2025]                   multi-domain   MPNN, GT   std       –        –         –         open           open          partial
GRAPHNETZ(ours)                                 63 + open      5 + opent    Holm✓     ✓      ✓         ✓         ✓
dispatcher trains each compatible (model,  task,  seed) combination in S=  10    seeds (0–9) and
automatically skips incompatible pairs . Every (model, task, seed) combination trains independently
with full-batch Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba,2014] and 64 hidden channels;  the optimizer
configuration follows the per-task defaults of the framework’s training routines:  lr = 10−2    with
weight decay 5×10  −4    for node classification, lr = 10−3    without weight decay for graph classification
and graph regression, and lr = 10−2    without weight decay for link prediction. The number of epochs
E is set per task to keep total runtime in a laptop-friendly budget (Cora, CiteSeer, PubMed: 100;
MUTAG: 40; ZINC: 10; MNIST-superpixels: 4; FB15k-237: 20; Euroroad, Board-directors, Internet
AS: 40–80; TSP-random and Ising-lattice: 60-80; 9/11 terrorists: 120). Random number generators
are reset before each run, so the entire pipeline is deterministic given a fixed software stack.
The  multi  adapters  described  in  Section2register  every  node-level  encoder  for  every  task,  so
each category exposesat least fourmodels for comparison; categories whose natural task is graph
classification expose five (the four node-level encoders wrapped with mean-pool plus the native GIN).
The selected datasets and the corresponding tasks are listed in Table3.  The knowledge slot uses
FB15k-237 with a relational DistMult decoder over the canonical (train,  valid,  test) edge
split shipped by PyG’s RelLinkPredDataset:  relation types are kept and the score is⟨z h,r,zt⟩.
The AUC reported here is a baseline rather than the SOTA relational LP number, since the encoder
uses fabricated 3-d log-degree node features and a single-pass DistMult head; replacing either with a
stronger choice is straightforward but orthogonal to the methodological focus of this paper.


3.2    Pre-registered statistical analysis

For each (task, model) pair we report mean± 95 % Student’st CI half-width (Eq. 2) across the ten
seeds. Within each task we runtwopairwise tests on per-seed final metrics: a paired     t-test (parametric)
and a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (non-parametric); both are corrected with Holm–Bonferroni (Eq. 4)
atα= 0.05      .  The Wilcoxon variant follows the recommendation ofBenavoli et al.[2016] and is
included here as a robustness check on the parametric test’s normality assumption. Across the ten
executed categories we rank the four node-level encoders per task with the correct metric direction
(higher accuracy and higher AUC are better, lower MAE is better), average the ranks, and compute
the Nemenyi critical difference (Eq. 6) atα= 0.05       withk= 4   andN= 10   . The Friedman–Nemenyi
step is rank-based and therefore inherits no parametric assumption from either pairwise test.


3.3    Per-category results

Figure2renders one panel per category; each panel uses the natural metric for the underlying task
(test accuracy for node classification on the canonical Planetoid split, validation accuracy on a per-run
80/20 in-script split for graph classification, validation MAE for graph regression, and test AUC for
link prediction on a held-out edge split) and shows the mean± 95 % CI across ten seeds. Table3lists
the same numbers in long format. Because every working category receives at least four architectures,
the per-category bars admit the full within-task pairwise machinery (pairedt on seed-aligned final
metrics with Holm–Bonferroni correction) without any change to the protocol.


3.4    Across-category ranking

Although the per-category metrics are not commensurable (test accuracy vs. test AUC vs. MAE),
ranksare.  The Friedman statistic and Nemenyi post-hoc described in AppendixAyield the CD
diagram of Figure3.  The Friedman omnibus on the same rank table gives     χ23 = 2.04    (p= 0.56     ),
so we already fail to reject the global null of equal mean ranks atα= 0.05       before applying any
post-hoc. Withk= 4   node-level encoders common to every category andN= 10    tasks, the Nemenyi
critical difference isCD0.05   = 1.48    rank units. GraphSAGE has the lowest mean rank (¯r= 2.10       ),
followed by GCN (2.40   ), the Graph Transformer (2.60   ), and GAT (2.90   ). The maximum rank gap
(between GraphSAGE and GAT) is 0.80   , which is belowCD, sononeof the four architectures is
significantly different from any other atα= 0.05       across this benchmark:  all four fall in a single
Nemenyi clique. This is a sharper version of the headline argument: under a uniform held-out test
metric on heterogeneous tasks, headline differences between canonical GNN architectures dissolve at
typical sample sizes.


                                                             5
3.5    Sensitivity to the pairwise test

The two pairwise tests of Section3.2agree on every within-task comparison at the seed count used
here. Table2reports the side-by-side adjusted    p-values on the social/Planetoid demo (Cora, CiteSeer, = 18 comparisons): both the pairedt-test and the Wilcoxon signed-rank flag
PubMed, 3×  42                                                                                                     ten
comparisons as significant atα= 0.05       after Holm–Bonferroni correction, and disagree on none. The
agreement is not coincidence: it is a structural consequence of running the demo atS= 10   rather
than at smaller seed counts where the exact Wilcoxon null is too coarse to clear Holm correction.

Why Wilcoxon and pairedt agree atS= 10  .   With S= 10   paired observations and a two-sided
exact null, the smallest achievable Wilcoxonp-value is 2·2 −S    = 1/512≈0.00195                , attained when
all ten paired differences share the same sign. Six pairwise comparisons per task multiply through
Holm to 0.00195×6≈0.0117                        , which is well below theα= 0.05       threshold. The pairedt-test, by
contrast, has a continuous null and can drivep-values arbitrarily low when the seeds agree strongly.
AtS= 10   both tests have sufficient power to detect the systematic differences visible in the Planetoid
demo; the agreement on all 18 comparisons is a reassurance that the parametric assumption is not
misleading here. At smaller seed counts (S= 5   gives a smallest adjusted Wilcoxonp≈0.375        ) the
non-parametric test would be underpowered and the two methods would diverge, which is why the
framework recommends Wilcoxon as the small-sample default while reporting both.

Recommendation.We followBenavoli et al.[2016] in treating the Wilcoxon signed-rank test as the
small-sample-friendly default for classifier comparisons, while reporting the pairedt-test in parallel
as the more powerful (but more parametric) alternative. The framework’s default report includes both
(report.pairwise(method="t") and report.pairwise(method="wilcoxon")) so the reader
can inspect the agreement directly; pairs where the two tests agree deserve more confidence than
pairs where they disagree.


Table 2:Per-task pairwise tests on the social/Planetoid sweep (Cora,  CiteSeer,  PubMed;  S=  10    seeds, = 18 comparisons). ∆µ    is the mean accuracy difference (positive = first model better).ptHolm andpW
3×  42                                                                                                                 Holm
are Holm-adjusted paired-t and Wilcoxon signed-rankp-values, with            khaki  marking significance atα= 0.05      .
 almondmarks non-significant pairs.
         Task             Comparison                        ∆µ    p           tHolm    pWHolm       Agree
                       GATVS. GCN       −0.018                                  0.000523       0.0117✓
                       GATVS. GraphSAGE     −0.006                                 0.341       0.547✓
         Cora          GATVS. GraphTransformer−0.001                               0.778       0.713✓
                       GCNVS. GraphSAGE                   +0.012                 3.58e-05      0.0117✓
                       GCNVS. GraphTransformer+0.017                            0.000149       0.0117✓
                       GraphSAGEVS. GraphTransformer    +0.005                     0.176       0.264✓
                       GATVS. GCN       −0.043                                  0.000139       0.0117✓
                       GATVS. GraphSAGE     −0.050                              0.000274       0.0117✓
         CiteSeer      GATVS. GraphTransformer−0.060                             9.06e-06      0.0117✓
                       GCNVS. GraphSAGE     −0.008                                 0.245       0.164✓
                       GCNVS. GraphTransformer−0.017                             5.12e-05      0.0117✓
                       GraphSAGEVS. GraphTransformer −0.009                        0.245       0.164✓
                       GATVS. GCN       −0.027                                  0.000108       0.0117✓
                       GATVS. GraphSAGE     −0.004                                 0.444         0.5    ✓
         PubMed        GATVS. GraphTransformer+0.003                               0.48        0.574✓
                       GCNVS. GraphSAGE                   +0.023                 1.93e-06      0.0117✓
                       GCNVS. GraphTransformer+0.030                             7.14e-07      0.0117✓
                       GraphSAGEVS. GraphTransformer    +0.007                    0.0818       0.0703✓


3.6    Scope of the experiment

The cross-category experimentisa multi-architecture, multi-category benchmark: every working
category receives at least four architectures with paired-by-seed confidence intervals on a uniform
metric, and the four-encoder slice common to all categories admits a proper across-task CD diagram.


                                                             6
It isnota single uniform-metric leaderboard, and the per-category bar in Figure2should not be
compared against the bar in a neighboring category. Homogeneous head-to-head comparisons must
restrict attention to a single task.


































































Figure 2:Cross-category dashboard: one representative dataset per research area, every compatible architecture
trained across the same ten seeds.


                                                               7
                                                  Table 3:Cross-category benchmark results. Each row is one representative dataset; each cell is the seed mean
                                                  x±h    withh the 95 % Student’st CI half-width across ten seeds. The metric direction column gives the “best”
                                                  direction (↑ higher /↓ lower).                        khaki  marks the best architecture per row;                                   almond  marks architectures whose
                                                  95 % CI overlaps that of the winner (statistically indistinguishable at this sample size);n/amarks architectures
                                                  that are incompatible with the task.






























































                                                  Figure 3:Cross-category Demšar critical-difference (CD) diagram at  α= 0.05       acrossN= 10    tasks.  The
                                                  diagram is restricted to the four node-level encoders (GCN, GAT, GraphSAGE, Graph Transformer) that are
                                                  present in every category.




Category             Dataset                       Kind             Metric             GCN                   GAT                  SAGE                   GT                     GIN8

Combinatorial      TSP-random                link_pred      AUC↑                 0.864 ±0.025         0.832 ±0.017            0.884 ±0.021          0.871 ±0.023                    n/a
Biology               MUTAG                     graph_cls      Acc.↑   0.705   ±0.059         0.637 ±0.038         0.708 ±0.050         0.721 ±0.049                      0.834 ±0.036
Social                  Cora                           node_cls        Acc.↑     0.811 ±0.001         0.793 ±0.007         0.798 ±0.003         0.794 ±0.004                    n/a
Knowledge          FB15k-237                  link_pred      AUC↑                0.674 ±0.009         0.528 ±0.007            0.633 ±0.044         0.538 ±0.012                    n/a
Infrastructure       Euroroad                     link_pred      AUC↑   0.524   ±0.019                 0.609 ±0.022         0.534 ±0.030         0.524 ±0.021                    n/a
Finance               Board-directors            link_pred      AUC↑   0.968   ±0.007                  0.988 ±0.002         0.902 ±0.016         0.847 ±0.016                    n/a
Computing           Internet AS                 link_pred      AUC↑              0.967 ±0.001         0.652 ±0.015         0.751 ±0.018         0.598 ±0.070                    n/a
Vision                 MNIST-superpixels      graph_cls      Acc.↑   0.103   ±0.010         0.107 ±0.010         0.123 ±0.017         0.137 ±0.026                        0.267 ±0.038
Physics                Ising-lattice                 link_pred      AUC↑         0.676 ±0.030          0.625 ±0.031           0.632 ±0.021          0.628 ±0.026                    n/a
Security               9/11 terrorists              link_pred      AUC↑          0.685 ±0.096          0.756 ±0.083           0.700 ±0.103          0.712 ±0.089                    n/a
Table 4:Dataset loaders per research category entries. Note:NCnode classification,GCgraph classification,
GRgraph regression,LPlink prediction.
     Category                #     Kind     Loaders
     Combinatorial       6   LP   bipartite matching, TSP, VRP, coloring, max-cut, max-flow
                                 GC MUTAG, PROTEINS, ENZYMES, Peptides-func, ogbg-molhiv,
     Biology                12            ogbg-molpcba
                                 GR Peptides-struct
                                 LP   C. elegans, Budapest connectome, hospital contacts, high-school
                                          contacts, PPI

     Social                  16     NC  Cora, CiteSeer, PubMed, WikiCS, Roman-empire, Amazon-ratings,Minesweeper, Tolokers, Questions, ogbn-arxiv
                                 LP        Cora, CiteSeer, PubMed, MovieLens-100k, Karate, Facebook friends,
                                          DBLP coauthor, DNC emails, ogbl-collab
     Knowledge            3   LP   FB15k-237, WordNet18-RR, WordNet (Netz)
     Infrastructure         6   LP   power grid, EuroRoad, US roads, EU airlines, London transport,
                                          urban streets

     Finance                  5     NC  Elliptic Bitcoin, ogbn-productsLP   product space, board of directors, US patents

     Computing            4   LP   Internet AS, Internet topology, AS-Skitter, route views

     Vision                    5     NC  ShapeNetGC MNIST superpixels, CIFAR-10 superpixels, ModelNet10,
                                          ModelNet40

     Physics                  3     GR QM9, ZINCLP   Ising lattice

     Security                 3     GC MalNet-TinyLP   9/11 terrorists, train terrorists

     Total                    63


4    Discussion and Limitations

The cross-category result is a sharper version of the prior empirical finding that headline differences
among GNN architectures often disappear once seed-level variance and multiple comparisons are
properly accounted for [Shchur et al.,2018,Errica et al.,2020]. The CD diagram makes the residual
signal precise: atN= 10    heterogeneous tasks under uniform held-out test metrics, the largest mean-
rank gap among the four node-level encoders is 0.80   , below the Nemenyi thresholdCD0.05   = 1.48   ,
so none of the architectures is significantly different from any other atα= 0.05      . The methodological
implication is that the default report, per-cell CI, per-task pairwise Holm, across-task Friedman-
Nemenyi, is precisely calibrated to the kind of evidence the field actually has at typical sample
sizes.

Number of datasets.Friedman–Nemenyi power scales with the number of datasets      N: CDα
shrinks asp1/N  .  With N=  10     the diagram is informative about rankorderingbut unable to
certify the small mean-rank gaps observed here as significant; lifting more of the catalogue (e.g. the
heterophilic node-classification suite, the LRGB Peptides graphs, additional Netzschleuder snapshots)
into the sweep would tightenCDproportionally and is the right next experiment.

Fixed-epoch evaluation.The benchmark currently reports the test metric at a fixed final epoch.
Checkpoint selection on a held-out validation set, early stopping, and best-of-window aggregation
are natural extensions to the reporting layer that do not change the statistical pipeline of AppendixA.

Fixed hyperparameters.We hold optimisation hyperparameters fixed across categories.Errica
et al.[2020] argue that benchmarks should also be honest over the hyperparameter grid; extending
Algorithm1with an inner search loop is straightforward but multiplies compute.


                                                               9
Coverage gaps in the taxonomy.   Several subtopics still lack canonical public benchmarks: schedul-
ing and bin packing in combinatorics; patient-disease-treatment knowledge graphs in biology; inter-
bank exposure in finance; program control-flow, dataflow, build-dependency, and EDA graphs in
computing;  scene, skeleton, and SLAM pose graphs in vision;  Feynman diagrams and reaction
networks in physics;  attack and threat-intelligence graphs in security.  We document these gaps
explicitly so that downstream users do not assume coverage that is absent.

Parametric assumptions.The paired         t-test assumes approximate normality of per-seed differ-
ences.  With S=  10    seeds the test is robust under mild departures from normality.  The frame-
work  exposes  two  alternatives  on  the  same  paired-by-seed  scaffolding:   a  percentile-bootstrap
CI for skewed metrics (AppendixB) and a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank pairwise test
(report.pairwise(method="wilcoxon")).  The latter is the small-sample-friendly default rec-
ommended byBenavoli et al.[2016] for classifier comparisons; pass                  method="wilcoxon" or set
report.pairwise_method once and the Holm correction, the LaTeX exporter, and the pairwise
significance plots all switch over.

5    Conclusion

GNN benchmarking sits at contrasting methodological grounds: the field has the statistical apparatus
it needs, but the apparatus is not part of the default reporting pipeline.GRAPHNETZpackages a
category× task dataset taxonomy, a uniform model-evaluation protocol across four tasks categories,
and a statistically structured reporting layer behind a benchmark whose default output is a structured
statistical report. A single cross category run across ten heterogeneous tasks produces seed-paired
confidence intervals per category and a Friedman-Nemenyi CD diagram between categories in which
all four node-level encoders fall within a single indistinguishable clique atα= 0.05      , a calibrated
picture of what the data actually support.

Reproducibility.   The benchmark protocol is fully specified by Algorithm1and the hyperparameters
in Section3.1. All random number generators are seeded, so given a fixed software stack, the pipeline
is deterministic.

Data and code availability.   All datasets used in Section3are released under their original public
licenses; loaders for them are part of theGRAPHNETZcatalog. Synthetic categories (combinatorial,
physics) are generated deterministically from the protocol seeds.
The natural research and implementation trajectory forGRAPHNETZinvolves expanding into graph
foundation models and relational datasets, while prioritizing graph learning applications in real-world
and scalable research environments.

References
M. Bechler-Speicher, B. Finkelshtein, F. Frasca, L. Müller, J. Tönshoff, A. Siraudin, V. Zaverkin,
   M. M. Bronstein, M. Niepert, B. Perozzi, M. Galkin, and C. Morris.   Position:  Graph learn-
   ing will lose relevance due to poor benchmarks.  InForty-second International Conference on
   Machine Learning Position Paper Track, 2025.  URL   https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   nDFpl2lhoH.

A. Benavoli, G. Corani, and F. Mangili. Should we really use post-hoc tests based on mean-ranks?
   Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(5):1–10, 2016. URL   https://jmlr.org/papers/
   volume17/benavoli16a/benavoli16a.pdf.

J. Demšar. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets.Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 7:1–30, 2006.

V. P. Dwivedi, C. K. Joshi, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and X. Bresson.  Benchmarking graph neural
   networks. InWorkshop on Graph Representation Learning, NeurIPS, 2020.

V. P. Dwivedi, L. Rampášek, M. Galkin, A. Parviz, G. Wolf, A. T. Luu, and D. Beaini. Long range
   graph benchmark. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                                          10
F. Errica, M. Podda, D. Bacciu, and A. Micheli.  A fair comparison of graph neural networks for
   graph classification.International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with pytorch geometric, 2019.

S. Freitas, Y. Dong, J. Neil, and D. H. Chau. A large-scale database for graph representation learning.
   InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track,
   2021.

W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec.  Inductive representation learning on large graphs.  In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

S. Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure.Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
   6(2):65–70, 1979.

W. Hu, M. Fey, M. Zitnik, Y. Dong, H. Ren, B. Liu, M. Catasta, and J. Leskovec. Open graph bench-
   mark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

M. Hutson. Artificial intelligence faces reproducibility crisis, 2018.

D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
   2014.

T. N. Kipf and M. Welling.  Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.  In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

C. Morris, N. M. Kriege, F. Bause, K. Kersting, P. Mutzel, and M. Neumann. TUDataset: A collection
   of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs, 2020.

T. P. Peixoto. The netzschleuder network catalogue and repository, 2020. URL https://networks.
   skewed.de/.

O. Platonov, D. Kuznedelev, M. Diskin, A. Babenko, and L. Prokhorenkova.   A critical look at
   the evaluation of GNNs under heterophily:  Are we really making progress?   InInternational
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassi-Rad. Collective classification in
   network data.AI Magazine, 29(3):93–106, 2008.

O.  Shchur,  M.  Mumme,  A.  Bojchevski,  and  S.  Günnemann.   Pitfalls  of  graph  neural  network
   evaluation.Workshop on Relational Representation Learning, NeurIPS, 2018.

Y. Shi, Z. Huang, S. Feng, H. Zhong, W. Wang, and Y. Sun.  Masked label prediction:  Unified
   message passing model for semi-supervised classification. InInternational Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2021.

T. Stoll, C. Qian, B. Finkelshtein, et al. GraphBench: Next-generation graph learning benchmarking.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04475, 2025.

P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio. Graph attention networks.
   InInternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

P. Veliˇckovi´c, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D. Hjelm. Deep graph infomax.
   InInternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

M. Weber, G. Domeniconi, J. Chen, D. K. I. Weidele, C. Bellei, T. Robinson, and C. E. Leiserson.
  Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with graph convolutional networks for financial
   forensics, 2019.

K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks? InInternational
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.


                                                           11
A    Statistical Overview

We fix notation for the three layers of the statistical report produced by Algorithm1.

Per-cell estimation.For a fixed task and model, let     {x s}Ss=1   be the per-seed final test metrics from
Sindependent training runs. The unbiased estimators of the population mean and variance are


                                               SX                             SX
                                    ¯x=       1S  xs,       ˆσ    2 =    1S−1    (x s−¯x)        2.                                      (1)
                                             s=1                            s=1
The Student’st(1−α)confidence interval for the mean is¯x±hwith half-width
                                                  h=t   S−1,1−α/2              ˆσ/ √S,                                                       (2)
wheretS−1,1−α/2                is the 1−α/2        quantile of thet-distribution withS−1       degrees of freedom. We
report¯x±hthroughout.

Per-task pairwise tests.For a fixed task, let    x(i)s    andx(j)s    denote the per-seed final metrics for
modelsi andj, and letds =x   (i)s −x   (j)s   . Pairing by seed cancels seed-level variance. The paired-t
statistic
                                                       Tij =       ¯dˆσ d/√S,                                                              (3)
with  ¯d and ˆσ d the sample mean and standard deviation ofds, is referred to atS−1      null.  The k
                                                                                                                                2
pairwise testswithina task are corrected with the Holm-Bonferroni step-down procedure [Holm and define adjusted values,
1979]: order rawp-valuesp                       (1)≤...≤p        (m)     withm=     k 2
                                     ˜p  (r)    = min 1, maxr′≤r(m−r   ′ + 1)p    (r′) .                                        (4)

Holm controls the family-wise error rate atα and is uniformly more powerful than plain Bonferroni.
We additionally report the paired effect size as Cohen’sdz  =  ¯d/ˆσ   d, which is invariant toS and
complements thep-value with a magnitude.

Wilcoxon signed-rank alternative. The paired t-test relies on approximate normality ofds, which
at smallS is fragile. The framework exposes a non-parametric alternative on the same paired-by-
seed scaffolding:  the Wilcoxon signed-rank test on{d s}.  Let Rs  =  rank(|d     s|)   be the rank of
each absolute paired difference (omitting ties at zero, following zero_method="wilcox");  the
signed-rank statistic
                                            W=   X             Rs − X              Rs                                                  (5)
                                                      s:d s>0            s:d s<0
is  referred  to  its  exact  null  at  small S  rather  than  to  a  normal  approximation.     The  re-
sulting p-values  feed  the  same  Holm  adjustment  of  Eq.  4.  Benavoli  et  al.[2016]  argue
this  is  the  small-sample-friendly  default  for  classifier  comparisons;   we  expose  it  through
report.pairwise(method="wilcoxon") (or the sticky report.pairwise_method attribute),
and the same flag flows intopairwise_to_latexand the pairwise significance plots.

Across-task aggregation.For benchmarks spanning      N tasks andk models, letrn,i be the rank of
modeli on taskn (rank 1 = best, with average ranks for ties and the metric direction handled per
task). The Friedman statistic
                                                h kX                    i                    X
                           χ2F  =    12Nk(k+ 1)        ¯r  2i− k(k+1)       24,       ¯r i =  1N  rn,i,                           (6)
                                                  i=1                                         n
rejects the global null of equal mean ranks at levelα when it exceeds the appropriateχ2k−1     quantile.
The Nemenyi post-hoc declares two models significantly different when their mean ranks differ by
more than the critical difference                               r
                                                 CDα =q α           k(k+ 1)
                                                                        6N   ,                                                       (7)
withqα the studentised-range quantile fork models at levelα. The Demšar diagram visualises mean
ranks on a number line and joins “cliques” of within-CD models with a horizontal bar; this is the
standard scalable view when the benchmark spans many tasks.


                                                                12
                                  Figure 4:Anatomy of a cross-category Demšar critical-difference (CD) diagram.Top:the         CDα reference
                                  scale, fixed byk andN  throughCDα  =q αpk(k+ 1)/(6N)                   , calibrates which mean-rank gaps are large
                                  enough to be significant.Middle:each model is plotted at its mean rank across the        N  tasks; lower is better.
                                  Bottom:clique bars connect contiguous runs of models whose total mean-rank span is below      CDα, they are
                                  not significantly different from one another at levelα. Models that share no bar (here A and C) are declared
                                  significantly different. The diagram is the standard scalable view when the benchmark spans many tasks; in this
                                  paper it appears as Figure 3 withk= 4   encoders andN= 10    tasks, whereCD0.05    = 1.48    exceeds the largest
                                  observed mean-rank gap and all four architectures fall in a single Nemenyi clique.


                                  Reading the cross-category Demšar CD diagram.The CD diagram answers three questions at
                                  once:(i)which models rank highest on average across the benchmark,(ii)which pairs of models
                                  are statistically interchangeable at levelα, and(iii)what minimum mean-rank gap counts as a real
                                  ordering. Figure4labels the visual elements. The reading protocol is:

                                   1.  Locate each model on the horizontalmean-rank axis. Lower mean rank is uniformly better by
                                        construction, per-task ranks are computed with the metric direction already factored in (higher
                                        accuracy/AUC is rank 1, lower MAE is rank 1) and only then averaged across tasks;
                                   2.  Read theCDα referenceat the top: any pair of models whose mean ranks differ by more than
                                        this length is declared significantly different at levelα by the Nemenyi post-hoc. The reference is
                                        fixed bykandNthrough Eq. 6 and is independent of the data;
                                   3.  Inspect the horizontalclique bars: each bar joins a contiguous run of models whose mean-rank
                                        span is belowCDα. Models under a common bar are not significantly different from one another.
                                        Models that are not connected by any shared bar are significantly different.

                                  Three caveats.  First, CDα shrinks asp1/N  , so adding benchmark tasks tightens the threshold
                                  proportionally; withN= 10    the diagram is informative about rankorderingbut rarely strong enough
                                  to certify small gaps as significant. Second, only models present on every task enter the rank table,
                                  dropping a single model from one task removes it from the diagram entirely. Third, the diagram makes
                                  a statement about average rank, not about absolute metric magnitude: a single-rank improvement on
CDα = 1.40rank units  (α= 0.05,k= 5,N= 12)a tiny task counts as much as a single-rank improvement on a large one.(1) Reference scale.
                                                                                                     A pair of models is significantly
                                                                                                     different iff their mean ranks
                                                                                                     differ by more thanCD  α.
                                Model BB    Bootstrap Confidence IntervalsModel D
                     Model A    (2.10)                    Model C   (3.90)  Model E
                      (1.60)                              (3.40)            (4.30)                   (2) Model marker.
                                                                                                     Plotted at the model’s mean rank
                                  The Student’st confidence interval of AppendixAassumes that per-seed final metrics are approx-across allNtasks (lower is better).
                                  imately normally distributed.  For metrics that are bounded away from this assumption, Hits@K
                                  on knowledge graphs, MRR, AUC on highly imbalanced edge splits, a percentile bootstrap is more
                                  honest. We expose a percentile-bootstrap CI as a drop-in alternative: pass method="bootstrap"
                                  to report.summary() or set report.ci_method  =  "bootstrap" so that every downstream plot
            1                   2 and LaTeX export uses the bootstrap envelope.34            5
                               Mean rank acrossNtasks (lower is better)
                                                                                                  13(3) Clique bar.
                                                                                                     Connects models whose mean-rank
                                                                                                     span is belowCD α – i.e.
                                                                                                     not significantly different.


                    A vs. C: rank gap1.80>CD    α⇒significantly different
Procedure. For a fixed (task, model) cell with per-seed final metrics {x s}Ss=1   we drawB resamplesP
{x ∗b}Bb=1   with replacement, each of sizeS, and compute the resampled means ¯x ∗b =  1S                    sx∗b,s. The
(1−α)          percentile interval is [q α/2    (¯x ∗), q  1−α/2       (¯x ∗) ].  Because the report API displays a singleq1−α/2       (¯x ∗)−q  α/2    (¯x ∗),
¯x±h        figure per cell for symmetry with thet-CI form, we reporth=    12
i.e. the half-width of a symmetric envelope with the same total width as the percentile interval. We
useB= 10,000         by default and seed the resampling RNG with a configurable bootstrap_seed so
the bootstrap is itself reproducible.

When to prefer it. At  S= 10   seeds thet-CI and bootstrap envelopes coincide for near-Gaussian
metrics; the bootstrap is meaningfully tighter when the per-seed distribution is skewed (e.g. a single
seed lands far above or below the others on AUC). The bootstrap also degrades more gracefully than
thet-CI on metrics with hard ceilings: a sample clustered at 0.99    test accuracy yields a percentile
interval that respects the upper bound, whereas thet-CI happily extends past1.0.

C    Custom-Model Templates

GRAPHNETZships five built-in architectures (Section2) behind a small registration surface so
user-defined models flow through the same multi-seed, Holm-corrected, CD-diagrammed pipeline.
We document the three integration paths below; all three end at the samerun_benchmarkcall.

Path A: decorator (recommended for libraries).Permanent registration at import time.  The
model becomes visible to every run_benchmark call by name and the dispatcher skips incompatible
(model, task) pairs without further bookkeeping.

importtorch
fromtorch_geometric.nnimportGCNConv
fromgraphnetzimportregister_model,  run_benchmark

@register_model(task_type={"node_cls"})
classTinyGCN(torch.nn.Module):
      def__init__(self,  in_channels,  hidden_channels,  out_channels):
            super().__init__()
            self.conv1  =  GCNConv(in_channels,  hidden_channels)
            self.conv2  =  GCNConv(hidden_channels,  out_channels)

      defforward(self,  data):
            x,  ei  =  data.x,  data.edge_index
            returnself.conv2(torch.relu(self.conv1(x,  ei)),  ei)

report  =  run_benchmark("social",  {"TinyGCN":  TinyGCN},
                                task_type="node_cls",  seeds=(0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9))


Path B: class attribute (no decorator dependency).Equivalent semantics; useful when imports
cannot be edited at the top of a third-party file.

classAttrGCN(torch.nn.Module):
      task_types  =  {"node_cls"}
      def__init__(self,  in_channels,  hidden_channels,  out_channels):
            ...


Path C: inline tuple (one-shot variants).Useful for hyperparameter sweeps where each vari-
ant  needs  its  own  factory.    The  third  slot  is  a  callable  (in_channels,  hidden_channels,
out_channels)→Module.

run_benchmark(
      "social",
      {
            "MyGNN-d0.3":  (MyGNN,"node_cls",
                                  lambdai,  h,  o:  MyGNN(i,  h,  o,  dropout=0.3)),


                                                           14
            "MyGNN-d0.5":  (MyGNN,"node_cls",
                                   lambdai,  h,  o:  MyGNN(i,  h,  o,  dropout=0.5)),
      },
      seeds=(0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9),
)


Multi-task factory.   For node-level encoders that should run onall fourtask types without writing
the adapter glue,  we expose _multi_task_factory(cls),  which wraps the encoder with the
appropriate adapter (graph-level pooling head, dot-product link-prediction head, or DGI head) given
the dispatched task type.

fromgraphnetz.benchmarkimport_multi_task_factory,  register_model

classMyEncoder(torch.nn.Module):
      """Returnsper-nodeembeddingsofshape[N,hidden_channels]."""
      ...

ALL_TASKS  =  {"node_cls","graph_cls","graph_reg","link_pred"}
register_model(MyEncoder,  task_type=ALL_TASKS,
                      factory=_multi_task_factory(MyEncoder))


D    Custom-Dataset Templates

The catalog ships 63 loaders, butGRAPHNETZis not a closed catalog:  any object satisfying the
standard PyG contract can be plugged in as aTaskand run through the same statistical pipeline.

Path A: ad-hoc tasks= (no global state).The simplest form.  Wrap an already-loaded dataset
with task_from_dataset and pass it to run_benchmark through the tasks= argument; nothing
is  registered  globally,  so  test  code  that  uses  this  path  leaves  the BENCHMARK_TASKS  dictionary
untouched.

fromgraphnetzimportGCN,  run_benchmark,  task_from_dataset

ds  =  my_loader("data/my_dataset")  #anyPyG-shapeddataset
task  =  task_from_dataset("my_dataset","node_cls",  ds,  epochs=100)

report  =  run_benchmark(
      models={"GCN":  GCN},
      tasks=[task],
      seeds=(0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9),
)


Path       B:       permanent       registration.For       datasets       that       should       appear       in
iter_benchmark_tasks(category=...)       alongside   the   built-ins.       Always   pair   with
unregister_taskin tests so state does not leak between cases.

fromgraphnetzimportregister_task,  task_from_dataset,  unregister_task

register_task("my_lab",  task_from_dataset(
      "my_assay","graph_cls",  ds,  epochs=50))

#...later...
"my_lab","my_assayunregister_task(")


Path  C:  seed-aware  loader  for  synthetic  data.For  generators  rather  than  fixed  datasets,
write  a  loader  that  takes  a seed  keyword  argument.   The  dispatcher  detects  the  parameter  via
inspect.signature and threads the benchmark seed into the loader, so cross-seed variance reflects
bothmodel initialisation and data resampling instead of only the former.


                                                           15
fromgraphnetz.benchmarkimportTask

defsynthetic_loader(_root,  *,  seed):
      returnMySyntheticDataset(num_graphs=100,  seed=seed)

task  =  Task("synthetic_g100","graph_cls",  synthetic_loader,  epochs=20)
run_benchmark(models={"GCN":  GCN},  tasks=[task],
                    seeds=(0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9))


Conventions per task type.A custom dataset must satisfy the conventions of the trainer for
its declared task_type: a Data object with train_mask/val_mask/test_mask for node_cls; a
graph-level y for graph_cls and graph_reg; an edge_index suitable for RandomLinkSplit for
homogeneous link_pred; and train_edge_index/train_edge_type, plus the valid_*/test_*
counterparts and num_relations, for relational link_pred. The runner detects the relational variant
from the data attributes and routes it through a DistMult decoder automatically; nothing else in the
call site changes.

E    Reproducibility and RNG Reseeding

Algorithm1reseeds every random number generator the training code reaches before each(task,
model, seed)triple: Python         random, NumPy, Torch CPU, and Torch CUDA (when available). With a
fixed software stack – torch  >=  2.6, torch-geometric  >=  2.6, the same CUDA driver – the
entire pipeline is deterministic.

Combinatorial seed threading.   For loaders whose signature exposes a  seed keyword (the synthetic
combinatorial generators in Section2and any user-defined seed-aware loader from AppendixD),
the dispatcher passes the benchmark seed into the loader as well. This is a small but methodologi-
cally important detail: cross-seed variance for synthetic-data benchmarks then reflects both model
initialisation and data resampling, instead of only the former. For loaders without a seed keyword
the dataset is loaded once and reused across seeds; the runner caches it to avoid re-downloading.

Software stack used for the headline experiment.  The numbers in Section3were produced with
Python 3.12, torch 2.6.0, torch-geometric 2.6.1, and scipy 1.13 on a CPU runner. All seeds in
(0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9) were used; the resulting pickled BenchmarkReport cache
is part of the artefact bundle so the figures and tables can be regenerated without retraining.

F    Broader Impact and Significance

GRAPHNETZdoes not propose new models or datasets and so has no direct deployment impact. Its
intended effect is methodological: lower the activation energy required to report GNN results with
confidence intervals and corrected pairwise tests, so that the modal benchmark paper in the field
communicates calibrated rather than over-confident evidence.  The same pipeline can be applied
to any future GNN architecture or dataset added to the catalog, and the methodological apparatus
generalizes to any benchmark whose output is a per task, method, and seed metric tensor.















                                                         16