     Dual-Network PINNs for Optimal Control:  A Reproducible
               Benchmark on the Mass–Spring–Damper System


                                                Abdeladhim Tahimi
           Centro de Engenharias e Ciˆencias Agr´arias, Universidade Federal de Alagoas, Brazil
                                        abdeladhim.tahimi@ceca.ufal.br
                                         Rinaldo Vieira da Silva Junior
           Centro de Engenharias e Ciˆencias Agr´arias, Universidade Federal de Alagoas, Brazil
                                           rinaldo.silva@ceca.ufal.br

                                                    June 16, 2026



                                                        Abstract

           This  work  presents  a  transparent  and  reproducible  benchmark  study  of  a  direct  dual-
       network  Physics-Informed  Neural  Network  (PINN)  formulation  for  the  optimal  control  of
       a  mass–spring–damper  system.   The  classical  linear-quadratic  optimal  control  problem  is
       solved by two independent classical methods – Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle with single
       shooting,  and  direct  transcription  through  trapezoidal  collocation  –  and  recast  as  a  con-
       strained optimization problem solved by two feedforward neural networks:  a state network
       whose boundary conditions are enforced exactly through a composite cubic-and-mask ansatz,
       and an unconstrained control network.  The composite loss combines the physics residual at
       the collocation points with a trapezoidal approximation of the cost functional, weighted by
       a  single  scalar  hyperparameter.   On  the  benchmark  considered,  the  PINN  reproduces  the
       classical  optimal  cost  to  four  significant  digits,  satisfies  the  terminal  state  constraints  ex-
       actly by construction, and produces pointwise state and control errors that fall within the
       spread of the two classical references.  Training is approximately two orders of magnitude
       slower than classical shooting on this benchmark, which is honestly reported.  The contri-
       bution  is  methodological  clarity  rather  than  methodological  novelty:  the  formulation  and
       the accompanying Google Colab implementation are intended to lower the barrier to entry
       for  practitioners  exploring  PINN-based  optimal  control  without  prior  exposure  to  adjoint
       methods or two-point boundary value problems.

       Keywords:Physics-Informed  Neural  Networks;  optimal  control;  mass–spring–damper  sys-
       tem; Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle; direct transcription; constrained optimization; scien-
       tific machine learning.


1    Introduction

Optimal control problems play a central role in mathematics, physics, and engineering because
many physical systems are governed by differential equations while simultaneously requiring the

                                                             1
optimization of constrained performance criteria.  Applications arise in areas such as aerospace
engineering, robotics, structural dynamics, energy systems, and fluid mechanics, where one seeks
to determine control strategies capable of steering the evolution of a dynamical system toward
a desired objective while respecting physical and operational constraints [Bryson and Ho, 1975,
Lions, 1971].  Classical benchmark systems remain particularly valuable in this context because
they provide analytically interpretable environments in which optimization methodologies can be
studied rigorously. Among these benchmark problems, the mass–spring–damper system occupies
a distinguished position due to its simplicity, physical interpretability, and broad relevance in
vibration analysis and control theory.

Classical  optimal  control  theory  provides  mathematically  rigorous  frameworks  for  addressing
such constrained dynamical problems [Bryson and Ho, 1975, Tr”oltzsch, 2010].  Direct meth-
ods reformulate the control problem into finite-dimensional optimization problems through dis-
cretization strategies, whereas indirect methods derive first-order optimality conditions based on
variational principles and Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle (PMP). These approaches have led
to powerful computational techniques including shooting methods, collocation methods, pseu-
dospectral methods,  adjoint-based optimization,  and Riccati formulations for linear-quadratic
systems [Rao, 2009].  Nevertheless,  despite their mathematical maturity and excellent perfor-
mance  for  many  benchmark  problems,  classical  approaches  may  become  increasingly  difficult
to implement in complex scenarios involving nonlinear dynamics, coupled multiphysics systems,
inverse problems, sparse observations, or high-dimensional parameter spaces.  In particular, the
derivation and implementation of adjoint systems and two-point boundary value problems often
represent a significant conceptual and computational barrier for newcomers entering the field.

In  recent  years,  Physics-Informed  Neural  Networks  (PINNs)  have  emerged  as  an  important
framework  within  scientific  machine  learning  for  solving  differential-equation-based  problems
through physics-informed optimization.  Introduced by Raissi et al. [2019], PINNs approximate
the solution of differential equations using neural networks trained through composite loss func-
tions that incorporate physical residuals,  boundary conditions,  and observational constraints.
The use of automatic differentiation enables the computation of derivatives directly through the
computational graph, thereby allowing the governing equations to be embedded into the opti-
mization process itself.  Since their introduction, PINNs have been successfully applied to a wide
variety of forward and inverse problems involving ordinary and partial differential equations, pa-
rameter estimation, hidden-physics discovery, and scientific data assimilation [Karniadakis et al.,
2021, Cuomo et al., 2022].  Recent review papers have further highlighted the growing role of
PINNs within the broader context of physics-informed scientific machine learning [Farea et al.,
2024, Luo et al., 2025, Ren et al., 2025].

Beyond forward simulation problems, PINN methodologies are increasingly being extended to-
ward optimal control and constrained optimization applications.  Recent works have investigated
direct and indirect PINN formulations for optimal control [Zhang et al., 2026], differentiable op-
timization frameworks [Khimin et al., 2024], Control PINNs [Barry-Straume et al., 2025], and
physics-informed approaches for PDE-constrained optimization problems [Schiassi et al., 2024].
These studies demonstrate that PINN formulations may naturally combine state approximation,



                                                          2
control optimization, parameter estimation, and physical constraints within a unified differen-
tiable  optimization  framework.   Such  formulations  become  particularly  attractive  in  inverse
problems  and  partially  observed  systems,  where  classical  optimization  pipelines  may  require
repeated  solver  calls,  mesh  generation  procedures,  or  iterative  adjoint  computations.   More-
over,  recent  literature  has  emphasized  the  growing  interaction  between  PINNs,  differentiable
programming, scientific machine learning, and control-oriented neural modeling [Wang and Yu,
2025, Wang et al., 2026, Legaard et al., 2023].

Despite the rapid development of the field, the current literature has also become increasingly
sophisticated from both mathematical and computational perspectives.  Many recent contribu-
tions focus on high-dimensional PDE-constrained optimization, advanced neural architectures,
operator-learning frameworks, Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman formulations, or structure-preserving
optimality systems [Barry-Straume et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2026].  Although these develop-
ments  are  scientifically  important,  they  may  also  create  a  substantial  accessibility  barrier  for
readers without prior experience in optimal control theory, adjoint methods, scientific machine
learning, or differentiable programming.  Recent educational and review-oriented contributions
have attempted to improve the accessibility of PINN methodologies and automatic differenti-
ation frameworks [Khimin et al., 2024, Lawal et al., 2022].  In particular, recent didactic work
has emphasized the importance of exposing the internal mechanics of PINN training rather than
treating automatic differentiation as a purely black-box procedure [Tahimi, 2026b,a].  Neverthe-
less, transparent benchmark-oriented studies connecting classical optimal control formulations
and direct PINN-based optimization strategies remain comparatively limited.
From an applied mathematics perspective, minimal and analytically verifiable benchmark prob-
lems remain essential for understanding the numerical and optimization behavior of emerging
methodologies.  Simple benchmark systems provide controlled environments in which approxi-
mation quality, optimization sensitivity, residual balancing, and training behavior can be studied
transparently before extending the methodology toward more sophisticated applications.  In this
work, the classical mass–spring–damper system is formulated as a constrained optimal control
problem with a quadratic objective functional.  The benchmark is deliberately chosen because
its  mathematical  structure  is  sufficiently  simple  to  admit  reliable  classical  reference  solutions
while remaining rich enough to illustrate the essential ingredients of direct PINN-based optimal
control.  The resulting framework allows a direct comparison between classical optimal-control
formulations and a physics-informed optimization strategy employing separate neural represen-
tations for the state and control variables.

The objective of the present work is therefore not to propose a fundamentally new PINN ar-
chitecture, nor to argue that PINNs outperform mature optimal-control solvers.  Instead, this
paper  aims  to  provide  a  transparent,  reproducible,  and  pedagogically  structured  benchmark
study illustrating how constrained optimal-control problems can be reformulated within a direct
physics-informed learning framework.  More specifically, the work presents: (i) the mathematical
formulation of a mass–spring–damper optimal control problem; (ii) its classical solution using
standard optimal-control methodology; (iii) a direct dual-network PINN formulation employing
independent neural representations for the state and control variables; (iv) a validation of the



                                                          3
neural approximation against classical reference solutions; and (v) a comparative discussion of
the advantages, limitations, and future potential of PINN-based optimal control formulations.
In  addition,  all  numerical  experiments  are  designed  to  be  reproducible  through  a  companion
Google Colab implementation intended to facilitate further educational and research-oriented
exploration.

2    Problem Formulation


The mass–spring–damper system is one of the most fundamental models in classical mechanics
and vibration theory.  It describes the motion of a point massm>0 attached to a linear spring
of stiffnessk >0 and subject to viscous damping with coefficientc >0,  under the action of
an  external  forceu(t)  acting  as  the  control  input.   The  governing  equation  of  motion  is  the
second-order linear ordinary differential equation

                                   m¨x(t) +c˙x(t) +kx(t) =u(t),   t∈[0,T],                                   (1)

wherex(t)∈Rdenotes the displacement of the mass from its equilibrium position,  and dots
denote differentiation with respect to time.  The external forcing termu(t)∈Ris treated as a
time-varying control function to be determined through optimization.

The optimal control problem consists of finding a control functionu: [0,T]→Rthat minimizes
a quadratic performance index measuring the integrated state deviation and control effort over
the fixed time horizon [0,T].  Specifically, the objective functional is defined as
                                                      Z  T  x(t)      2 +ru(t)          2dt,                                          (2)
                                            J[u] =
                                                        0

wherer>0 is a scalar weighting parameter balancing the relative penalization of state deviation
and control effort.  The control problem is subject to the dynamics (1), the initial conditions

                                                x(0) =x      0,       ˙x(0) =v         0,                                                  (3)

and the fixed terminal constraints

                                                x(T) = 0,       ˙x(T) = 0,                                                  (4)

requiring the system to reach a complete rest state at the final timeT.

The complete optimal control problem is therefore stated as follows.

       Problem (P).Find a control functionu∈L                                2([0,T])such that the functionalJ[u]
       defined in(2)is minimized, subject to the dynamical constraint(1), the initial con-
       ditions(3), and the terminal constraints(4).

The numerical parameters adopted throughout this work are summarized in Table 1.  The mass,
spring constant, and damping coefficient are chosen asm=k=c= 1 in consistent SI units,

                                                                4
yielding  a  damping  ratioζ=c/(2    √mk)  =  0.5,  which  places  the  uncontrolled  system  in  the
underdamped regime.  The time horizon is set toT= 5 s, which is sufficiently long to observe
both  the  natural  transient  response  and  the  effect  of  the  optimal  control  action.   The  initial
conditions arex      0 = 1 m andv        0 = 0 m/s, representing an initial displacement from equilibrium
with zero velocity.  The control weight is set tor= 0.1, which penalizes control effort lightly
relative  to  state  deviation,  thereby  encouraging  active  intervention  by  the  optimizer.   These
parameter  choices  result  in  a  well-posed  problem  admitting  a  unique  optimal  solution  that
serves as the reference throughout this study.

                      Table 1:  Numerical parameters of the optimal control problem.
                               Parameter                       Symbol    Value    Unit
                               Mass          m         1           kg
                               Spring constant      k            1           N m −1
                               Damping coefficient   c             1           N s m −1
                               Time horizon   T           5           s
                               Initial displacement   x  0            1           m
                               Initial velocity      v   0             0           m s−1
                               Terminal displacement x(T)        0           m
                               Terminal velocity             ˙x(T)        0           m s  −1
                               Control weight      r            0.1        —


3    Classical Optimal Control Solution

3.1    Optimality Conditions via Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle

The application of Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle requires recasting the second-order equa-
tion (1) as an equivalent first-order system [Bryson and Ho, 1975]. Introducing the state variables
x1(t) =x(t) andx                     2(t) =  ˙x(t), the dynamics (1) withm=k=c= 1 become

                                  ˙x 1(t) =x       2(t),       ˙x        2(t) =−x           1(t)−x         2(t) +u(t),                               (5)

with initial conditionsx        1(0) = 1,x    2(0) = 0, and fixed terminal constraintsx    1(T) = 0,x        2(T) = 0.

To apply the Pontryagin Minimum Principle, one associates a costate variableλ             i(t) with each
state variablex             i(t).  The Hamiltonian of problem(P)is defined as

                               H(x,u,λ) =x                    21 +ru    2 +λ    1x2 +λ    2 (−x      1−x    2 +u),                             (6)

wherex= (x                 1,x2)⊤ andλ= (λ             1,λ2)⊤.


Optimality condition.Since the Hamiltonian (6) is strictly convex inuand the control is
unconstrained, the optimal controlu  ∗(t) is obtained by setting∂H/∂u= 0, which gives

                                   2ru ∗(t) +λ       2(t) = 0     =⇒u   ∗(t) =−   λ2(t)2r  .                                  (7)


                                                                   5
Costate equations.The costate dynamics are governed by

                 ˙λ1(t) =−   ∂H∂x1  =−2x          1(t) +λ       2(t),            ˙λ2(t) =−   ∂H∂x2  =−λ       1(t) +λ       2(t).              (8)


Since the terminal state is fully fixed by (4), no transversality conditions are required and the
terminal costate valuesλ          1(T) andλ            2(T) are left free.


Two-point boundary value problem.Substituting the optimal control (7) into the state
equations (5) and combining with the costate equations (8) yields the following two-point bound-
ary value problem (TPBVP): findx(t) andλ(t) satisfying
                                                                     x2         
                                               x1 =                
                                            d     x2           −x    1−x    2− λ22r    ,                                            (9)
                                           dt     λ1              −2x      1 +λ    2
                                                  λ2               −λ    1 +λ    2

subject to the boundary conditions

                              x1(0) = 1,  x  2(0) = 0,   x  1(T) = 0,  x       2(T) = 0.                           (10)

The system (9)–(10) constitutes a four-dimensional autonomous ODE with split boundary con-
ditions:  two conditions are prescribed att= 0 and two att=T.  The unknown initial costate
valuesλ          1(0) andλ        2(0) are determined by enforcing the terminal conditions numerically.


Numerical solution via shooting.The TPBVP is solved using a single shooting method
[Rao, 2009].  Lets= (λ           1(0),λ      2(0))⊤ denote the unknown initial costate vector.  For a givens,
the system (9) is integrated forward fromt= 0 tot=Tusing a standard ODE solver, producing
terminal state valuesx          1(T;s) andx                2(T;s).  The shooting residual is defined as
                                                                      !          !
                                              R(s) =       x1(T;s)        −    0    ,                                             (11)
                                                           x2(T;s)             0

and the correct initial costate is found by solvingR(s) =0using a nonlinear root-finding algo-
rithm.  The resulting trajectoriesx     ∗1(t),x  ∗2(t), andu   ∗(t) =−λ   ∗2(t)/(2r) constitute the classical
PMP reference solution to problem(P).


3.2    Direct Transcription via Trapezoidal Collocation

Direct transcription methods reformulate the infinite-dimensional optimal control problem(P)
as a finite-dimensional nonlinear programming problem (NLP) by simultaneously discretizing
the state and control trajectories on a fixed time grid [Rao, 2009].  Unlike the indirect approach
of  Section  3.1,  no  costate  variables  are  introduced  and  no  optimality  conditions  need  to  be
derived analytically; instead, the physics constraints are enforced directly as algebraic equations


                                                                 6
at the collocation nodes.

Let{t         i}Ni=0  denote a uniform partition of [0,T] with step sizeh=T/N.  Denote the discretized
state and control values asx    i≈x(t        i),v   i≈˙x(t         i), andu       i≈u(t        i).  The state equations (5) are
enforced at each interior interval [t i,ti+1 ] using the trapezoidal rule:

                           xi+1 −x   i = h2 (v  i +v   i+1 ),                                                                       (12)

                           vi+1 −v   i = h2 [(−x      i−v   i +u   i) + (−x     i+1 −v   i+1  +u   i+1 )],                       (13)

fori= 0,...,N−1.  The objective functional (2) is approximated by the composite trapezoidal
quadrature rule
                                     " x20 +ru    20 + 2    N−1X   x2i +ru    2i + x2N +ru    2N#
                          Jh = h2                                                                         .                       (14)
                                                             i=1

The  resulting  NLP  seeks  the  decision  vectorz=  (x               0,v0,...,xN,vN,u0,...,uN)⊤∈R   3(N+1)
that minimizesJ                   h  subject to the collocation constraints (12)–(13), the initial conditionsx              0 =
1,v    0  =  0,  and  the  terminal  constraintsx    N  =  0,v   N  =  0.   This  constrained  NLP  is  solved
using a standard gradient-based optimizer, with the collocation constraints enforced as equality
constraints.  The discrete trajectories{x     ∗i},{v  ∗i}, and{u   ∗i}obtained at the solution provide a
second independent reference against which both the PMP solution and the PINN approximation
are subsequently validated.

4    PINN Formulation

4.1    Dual-Network Architecture

The PINN formulation of problem(P)employs two independent feedforward neural networks: a
state networkN      x(t;θ     x) approximating the displacement trajectoryx(t), and a control network
Nu(t;θ     u)  approximating  the  control  inputu(t).   The  use  of  separate  networks  for  state  and
control variables is consistent with recent direct PINN formulations for optimal control [Barry-
Straume et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2026].  Both networks take the scalar time variablet∈[0,T]
as their sole input and produce a scalar output.  Each network consists ofLhidden layers of
widthW, with hyperbolic tangent activationsσ(·) = tanh(·) applied elementwise at each hidden
layer.  The output layer is linear.  For a network withLhidden layers, the raw output is defined
recursively as

h(0) =t,  h       (ℓ)   =σ      W (ℓ) h(ℓ−1)     +b    (ℓ)  ,  ℓ= 1,...,L, F(t;θ) =W                        (L+1) h(L)    +b    (L+1) ,
                                                                                                                                (15)
whereθ={W                      (ℓ) ,b (ℓ) }collects all trainable weights and biases.  The hyperbolic tangent acti-
vation is chosen because it is smooth, bounded, and admits derivatives of all orders, properties
that are required for the automatic differentiation of the physics residual [Raissi et al., 2019].
In the numerical experiments of Section 5, both networks are instantiated withL= 4 hidden

                                                                  7
layers and widthW= 32, a configuration that is deliberately modest in order to preserve the
didactic character of the benchmark.


4.2    Hard Enforcement of Boundary Conditions

The  state  networkN      x  must  satisfy  four  boundary  conditions  exactly:   the  initial  conditions
x(0) = 1 and  ˙x(0) = 0, and the terminal constraintsx(T) = 0 and  ˙x(T) = 0.  Hard enforcement
is achieved by constructing a composite ansatz of the form

                                              ˆx(t;θ         x) =ϕ(t) +ψ(t)F                     x(t;θ     x),                                           (16)

whereϕ(t) is a fixed polynomial satisfying all four boundary conditions independently of the
network output,ψ(t) is a fixed masking function that vanishes att= 0 andt=Tto first order,
andF       x(t;θ     x) is the raw output of the state network as defined in (15).


Construction ofϕ(t).  A cubic polynomialϕ(t) =a                                            0+a    1t+a     2t2+a    3t3 has four free coefficients,
which are uniquely determined by imposing the four boundary conditionsϕ(0) = 1,ϕ        ′(0) = 0,
ϕ(T) = 0,ϕ   ′(T) = 0.  Solving the resulting linear system yields


                                                     ϕ(t) = 1−        3t  2T 2  + 2t  3T 3.                                                   (17)

One may verify directly thatϕ(0) = 1,ϕ    ′(0) = 0,ϕ(T) = 0, andϕ     ′(T) = 0, confirming that (17)
satisfies all required conditions exactly.


Construction ofψ(t).  The masking  function must vanish at  both  endpoints to  first  order
so that the composite ansatz (16) preserves the boundary conditions ofϕ(t) regardless of the
network outputF             x.  The quadratic mask

                                                     ψ(t) =t          2(T−t)          2/T 4                                                    (18)

satisfiesψ(0) =ψ(T) = 0 andψ          ′(0) =ψ ′(T) = 0, and is strictly positive on the open interval
(0,T), ensuring thatF               x retains full expressive freedom in the interior of the time domain.  The
normalization factorT             4 keepsψ(t)≤1 uniformly.


Verification.By construction, ˆx(0;θ                                 x) =ϕ(0) = 1 and ˆx(T;θ                x) =ϕ(T) = 0 for any value of
θx.  Differentiating (16) and evaluating at the endpoints gives  ˙ˆx(0) =ϕ  ′(0) +ψ ′(0)F      x(0) = 0
and  ˙ˆx(T) =ϕ    ′(T) +ψ  ′(T)F      x(T) = 0, confirming that all four boundary conditions are satisfied
exactly and independently of the network parameters throughout training.

The control ansatz requires no hard enforcement.  The control approximation is taken directly
as the raw network output
                                                      ˆu(t;θ         u) =F   u(t;θ     u),                                                    (19)




                                                                   8
which is unconstrained and enters the loss function solely through the physics residual and the
discretized cost functional defined in the following section.


4.3    Loss Function

The PINN loss function is constructed from two terms.  The first term penalizes violation of the
governing equation (1) at a set ofN    c collocation points{t      i}Nci=1  distributed uniformly on [0,T].
Using the composite ansatz (16), the second-order derivative  ¨ˆx(t      i) is computed via automatic
differentiation through the computational graph [Tahimi, 2026b].  The physics residual loss is

                                              NcX h¨ˆx(t      i;θ x) + ˙ˆx(t      i;θ x) + ˆx(t      i;θ x)−ˆu(t            i;θ u)i2.              (20)
                  Lphys(θ  x,θ u) =   1Nc
                                             i=1

The second term approximates the objective functional (2) using the composite trapezoidal rule
on the same collocation grid:
                            "             Nc−1X                     #
    Lcost(θ  x,θ u) = h2      f(t    1) + 2      f(t    i) +f(t       Nc),   f(t    i) = ˆx(t      i;θ x)2 +rˆu(t            i;θ u)2,    (21)
                                           i=2

whereh=T/(N                     c−1).  The total loss is the weighted sum of both terms:

                                 L(θ     x,θ u) =λ    physLphys(θ  x,θ u) +L    cost(θ  x,θ u),                               (22)

whereλ            phys >0 is a fixed scalar weight applied to the physics residual term.  The introduction
ofλ    phys  is  motivated  by  the  fundamentally  different  roles  of  the  two  loss  terms.   The  cost
termL          cost  is  an  approximation  of  the  objective  functionalJ[u]  that  the  optimizer  seeks  to
minimize,  while the physics residualL                phys  encodes the dynamical constraint (1) and must be
driven essentially to zero for the resulting trajectory to be a feasible solution of problem(P).
Without a sufficiently large weight on the residual term,  the optimizer is free to reduceL  cost
by violating the dynamics, producing a non-physical solution whose reported cost is artificially
lower than the true optimum.  The numerical valueλ         phys = 103 adopted in the present work is
selected through a small number of preliminary training runs in which the relative magnitudes of
λphysLphys andL        cost were monitored, and is held fixed for all experiments reported in Section 5.
The  role  ofλ    phys  and  the  loss-balancing  sensitivity  that  more  generally  characterizes  PINN
training are discussed further in Section 6.


4.4    Training Procedure

Training consists of minimizing the total loss (22) jointly with respect toθ    x andθ       u using a two-
phase optimization strategy.  In the first phase, the Adam optimizer is run for a fixed number
of epochs with a scheduled learning rate, providing robust initial convergence from a random
parameter initialization. In the second phase, the L-BFGS optimizer is applied to the parameters
delivered by Adam, exploiting second-order curvature information to refine the solution toward
a  high-accuracy  local  minimum.   This  two-phase  strategy  is  standard  practice  in  the  PINN


                                                                9
literature  [Raissi  et  al.,  2019,  Cuomo  et  al.,  2022]  and  is  adopted  here  without  modification.
The collocation grid usesN        c = 100 uniformly spaced points on [0,T].  All derivatives required
for  (20)  are  computed  via  automatic  differentiation  using  PyTorch’sautogradengine,  with
create    graph=Trueto enable higher-order differentiation through the ansatz.  Network weights
are initialized using the Glorot uniform scheme.  The complete implementation is provided in
the companion Colab notebook described in Section 5.

5    Numerical Results and Validation


This section validates the dual-network PINN formulation of Section 4 against the two indepen-
dent classical references developed in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2.  All three methods solve the
same optimal control problem (P) with the parameter values listed in Table 1.  To enable a uni-
form comparison, the PMP shooting solution, the discrete collocation NLP solution (cubically
interpolated from itsN= 100 NLP grid), and the trained PINN are all evaluated on a common
dense reference grid of 501 uniformly spaced points on [0,T].  The composite trapezoidal rule on
this dense grid is used to compute the cost functional and theL       2 error norms reported below.
The full pipeline is implemented in a companion Google Colab notebook that mounts Google
Drive,  writes  all  numerical  results  to  a  single  comma-separated  values  (CSV)  file,  and  saves
every figure through an independent rendering cell that re-reads the CSV from disk.


5.1    Reproducibility and reference grid

A  single  global  random  seed  is  used  to  initialize  the  random  number  generators  of  Python,
NumPy,  and  PyTorch  (including  the  CUDA  backend  when  available).   Network  weights  are
initialized with the Glorot uniform scheme.  Both PINN sub-networks employ four hidden layers
of  width  32  and  tanh  activations,  as  specified  in  Section  4.1.   The  training  collocation  grid
usesN        c = 100 points on [0,T] and is held fixed throughout the optimization.  All figures and
statistical quantities reported below are reproduced bit-identically by the companion notebook
provided the seed is preserved.


5.2    Validation of the classical references

The two classical methods provide independent reference solutions and are first validated against
each other.  The PMP shooting algorithm converges to terminal state residuals of order 10−15  ,
and  the  collocation  NLP  enforces  the  terminal  state  as  a  hard  equality  constraint,  yielding
residuals of order 10−20  .  The two methods agree on the optimal cost to within 1.3×10   −3    in
relative terms, withJ   ∗PMP = 6.872264×10      −1    andJ  ∗NLP = 6.881065×10      −1  .  The pointwiseL  ∞
error  between  the  two  reference  trajectories  is  1.10×10   −3    for  the  displacement,  2.54×10   −3
for  the  velocity,  and  1.10×10   −1    for  the  control.   The  small  but  non-negligible  discrepancy
reflects the trapezoidal discretization error of the NLP, which is of second order in the step size
h=T/N;  the PMP solution,  integrated with a high-order adaptive Runge–Kutta scheme,  is
therefore treated as the gold reference in the remainder of this section.


                                                           10
5.3    Training behaviour of the PINN

The  PINN  is  trained  by  minimizing  the  composite  lossL=λ              physLphys +L    cost  withλ         phys  =
103  following the discussion of Section 4.3.  A two-phase optimization strategy is used:  5,000
Adam epochs with a constant learning rate of 10−3  , followed by L-BFGS with strong Wolfe line
search.  The total training time on a standard Colab CPU runtime is approximately 125 seconds.
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the three loss components.  The physics residualL                phys drops by
roughly six orders of magnitude during Adam and continues to decrease through the L-BFGS
phase,  reaching  a  final  value  of  6.17×10   −8  .   The  cost  termL          cost  converges  to  6.874×10    −1
at the end of training,  in close agreement with the PMP reference value.  The total lossLis
numerically indistinguishable fromL          cost  once the residual has reached its asymptotic plateau,
which is expected:λ            physLphys≈6×10   −5    is several orders of magnitude smaller thanL          cost.






















Figure 1:  Training loss history of the dual-network PINN. The Adam phase occupies the first
5,000 iterations; the L-BFGS refinement begins immediately afterwards.


5.4    Trajectory comparison

Figures 2, 3, and 4 compare the three solution methods for the displacement, velocity, and control
trajectories, respectively.  The three curves are visually indistinguishable on the plotting scale
of the state variables, and only the optimal control near the initial time exhibits a small visible
discrepancy that is analysed in Section 5.5.  The optimal displacement decreases monotonically
fromx          0 = 1 m, briefly undershoots the equilibrium by approximately 0.07 m neart= 2.5 s, and
returns asymptotically to zero.  The optimal control begins at approximately−2.3 N, increases
monotonically,  crosses zero neart= 1.1 s,  peaks near +0.4 N,  and decays to zero at the final
time.  The PINN reproduces all of these qualitative features without any prior knowledge of the
classical solutions.





                                                             11
Figure 2:  Optimal displacementx(t) obtained by the three methods.  The curves overlap on the
plotting scale; the pointwise error is reported in Figure 5.

5.5    Pointwise error analysis

Figure 5 displays the absolute pointwise error of the PINN displacement against both classical
references on a logarithmic vertical axis.  Two features of the figure deserve emphasis.  First,
the interior error sits around 10−4  –10−3   m, which is comparable to the discrepancy between the
two classical references themselves.  The PINN therefore falls within the spread of the classical
baseline.  Second, the error collapses to machine precision at both endpoints.  This is the visual
signature of hard boundary-condition enforcement: the composite ansatz ˆx(t) =ϕ(t)+ψ(t)F                             x(t)
guarantees ˆx(0) = 1 and ˆx(T) = 0 identically, regardless of the network parameters.

Figure 6 displays the corresponding error for the control.  The error magnitude is approximately
one order of magnitude larger than for the state, and is concentrated at the initial time.  This
behaviour has two contributing causes.  First, the control approximation ˆu(t) is the raw network
output  and  is  not  constrained  at  the  endpoints,  in  contrast  to  ˆx.   Second,  the  magnitude  of
the  optimal  control  is  largest  neart=  0,  so  a  fixed  relative  error  produces  a  larger  absolute
error there.  Both effects are consistent with the hierarchy of approximation accuracy generally
observed in PINN formulations, in which the directly approximated quantity is the most accu-
rate, and quantities derived from it or independently approximated tend to exhibit progressively
larger errors.


5.6    Quantitative summary

Table 2 reports the optimal cost achieved by each method and the terminal constraint residuals.
The PINN agrees with the PMP reference to four significant digits in the cost functional, and
reaches the terminal state exactly by construction.  Table 3 reports theL       2  andL  ∞  pointwise
errors of all three pairwise comparisons.  The errors of PINN against either classical reference
are of the same order of magnitude as the errors between the two classical references themselves,

                                                            12
   Figure 3:  Optimal velocity  ˙x(t) obtained by the three methods.  For the PINN, the velocity is
   obtained by automatic differentiation of the composite state ansatz ˆx(t).


   confirming that the PINN solution lies within the spread of the classical baseline.

              Table 2:  Optimal cost and terminal constraint residuals for the three methods.
                           Method       J[u  ∗]     |x(T)|    |˙x(T)|
                           PMP              6.872264×10      −1      3.76×10   −15      9.09×10   −15
                           Collocation    6.881065×10      −1      1.48×10   −21      8.47×10   −20
                           PINN             6.871579×10      −1               0                      0


   Wall-clock training time is reported for completeness.  On the Colab CPU runtime, PMP shoot-
   ing  required  1.2 s,  the  SLSQP  collocation  NLP  required  10.4 s,  and  PINN  training  required
   125.0 s  in  total  (79.2 s  for  the  Adam  phase  and  45.8 s  for  the  L-BFGS  phase).   The  PINN  is
   therefore  not  competitive  with  the  classical  methods  in  training  time  on  this  benchmark,  a
   point discussed further in Section 6.


   5.7    Selected code excerpts

   For pedagogical clarity, three minimal Python excerpts from the companion notebook are re-
   produced here.  The complete implementation is available in the Colab notebook.

   The composite ansatz of Section 4.2 is implemented in three lines:

        Listing 1:  Hard enforcement of the four boundary conditions via the composite ansatz.

1  def  phi_fn(t):

2         return  1.0  -  3.0  *  (t  /  T)  **  2  +  2.0  *  (t  /  T)  **  3

3

4  def  psi_fn(t):

5         return  (t  **  2)  *  (T  -  t)  **  2  /  (T  **  4)

6

                                                                 13
   Figure 4:  Optimal controlu(t) obtained by the three methods.  A small visible discrepancy is
   observed neart= 0 where the magnitude of the optimal control is largest.


   Table 3:  PointwiseL         2 andL  ∞ errors of the three pairwise comparisons, computed on the dense
   reference grid of 501 uniformly spaced points.
                           Comparison                  Quantity  L   2 errorL   ∞ error
                           PINN vs PMP  x(t)            1.14×10        −3      9.29×10   −4
                                                            ˙x(t)            3.37×10     −3      3.70×10   −3
                                                           u(t)            2.43×10     −2      1.13×10   −1
                           PINN vs Collocationx(t)            1.36×10        −3      9.74×10   −4
                                                            ˙x(t)            3.51×10     −3      3.23×10   −3
                                                           u(t)            1.91×10     −2      4.15×10   −2
                           Collocation vs PMPx(t)            9.88×10        −4      1.10×10   −3
                                                            ˙x(t)            1.59×10     −3      2.54×10   −3
                                                           u(t)            1.19×10     −2      1.10×10   −1





7  def  x_hat(net_x,  t):

8         return  phi_fn(t)  +  psi_fn(t)  *  net_x(t)

   The composite loss combines the physics residual at the collocation points with the trapezoidal
   quadrature of the cost functional.  The required derivatives of ˆx(t) are obtained by automatic dif-
   ferentiation through the ansatz withcreate_graph=Trueto enable backpropagation of second-
   order derivatives:

           Listing 2:  Composite loss function combining physics residual and trapezoidal cost.

1  def  losses():

2         x_val  =  x_hat(net_x,  t_col_pinn)

3         u_val  =  u_hat(net_u,  t_col_pinn)

4         dx   =  torch.autograd.grad(x_val,  t_col_pinn,

5                           torch.ones_like(x_val),  create_graph=True)[0]


                                                                   14
    Figure 5:  Absolute pointwise error of the PINN displacement,|ˆx(t)−x                   ref(t)|, against the PMP
    and collocation references.  The collapse to machine precision att= 0 andt=Treflects the
    exact enforcement of the boundary conditions by the state ansatz.




 6         ddx  =  torch.autograd.grad(dx,  t_col_pinn,

 7                           torch.ones_like(dx),  create_graph=True)[0]

 8         residual  =  ddx  +  dx  +  x_val  -  u_val

 9         L_phys  =  (residual  **  2).mean()

10       f  =  x_val  **  2  +  r  *  u_val  **  2

11       L_cost  =  0.5  *  h_pinn  *  (f[0]  +  2.0  *  f[1:-1].sum()  +  f[-1]).squeeze()

12       return  L_phys,  L_cost

    The optimization loop combines an Adam warm-up phase with an L-BFGS refinement phase,
    following standard PINN practice:

           Listing 3:  Two-phase optimization:  Adam warm-up followed by L-BFGS refinement.

 1  #Phase1:Adam

 2  for  epoch  in  range(ADAM_EPOCHS):

 3         opt_adam.zero_grad()

 4         L_phys,  L_cost  =  losses()

 5         L  =  LAMBDA_PHYS  *  L_phys  +  L_cost

 6         L.backward()

 7         opt_adam.step()

 8

 9  #Phase2:L-BFGS

10def  closure():

11       opt_lbfgs.zero_grad()

12       L_phys,  L_cost  =  losses()

13       L  =  LAMBDA_PHYS  *  L_phys  +  L_cost

14       L.backward()

15       return  L

16opt_lbfgs.step(closure)


                                                                   15
Figure 6:  Absolute pointwise error of the PINN control,|ˆu(t)−u                        ref(t)|, against the PMP and
collocation references.  The control approximation is not subject to hard endpoint enforcement,
and the error attains its maximum neart= 0 where the magnitude of the optimal control is
largest.

6    Discussion

The results of Section 5 establish that the dual-network PINN formulation reproduces the clas-
sical  optimal  control  solution  of  problem(P)to  four  significant  digits  in  the  cost  functional
and to three significant digits in the pointwise state trajectory, on a benchmark for which two
independent classical references are available.  The purpose of the present section is to interpret
these results in their proper methodological context, to acknowledge the limitations of the for-
mulation studied here, and to identify the regimes in which a direct PINN approach to optimal
control may become genuinely competitive with classical methodologies.


6.1    Loss balancing and the role of the residual weight

The introduction of the weighting parameterλ                     phys  in Equation (22) is the single most conse-
quential design choice in the formulation.  Preliminary experiments without weighting confirmed
the failure mode anticipated in Section 4.3:  the optimizer reduced the cost termL          cost to values
substantially below the true optimumJ  ∗, at the price of a physics residualL                phys of order 10−3
that produced a non-physical trajectory.  The resulting solution is inadmissible:  it minimizes
a quadratic functional over a function space in which the dynamical constraint is only weakly
satisfied.  The introduction of a fixed weightλ  phys = 103 restored the correct hierarchy between
constraint satisfaction and objective minimization, driving the residual below 10−7   while leaving
the cost term in close agreement with both classical references.

This  behaviour  is  consistent  with  the  broader  experience  reported  in  the  PINN  literature,  in
which loss-balancing has been identified as a recurrent source of training pathologies [Cuomo
et al., 2022, Farea et al., 2024]. Several systematic approaches have been proposed in recent years,

                                                            16
including adaptive weighting strategies, neural tangent kernel diagnostics, and constraint-based
reformulations  through  Lagrangian  or  penalty-method  updates  [Ren  et  al.,  2025,  Luo  et  al.,
2025].  The present work deliberately employs the simplest possible weighting strategy – a single
fixed  scalar  –  in  order  to  preserve  the  didactic  character  of  the  benchmark  and  to  make  the
role of the residual weight transparent.  More sophisticated weighting schemes are likely to be
necessary  in  extensions  to  nonlinear  dynamics  or  higher-dimensional  state  spaces,  where  the
asymmetry between the two loss components may evolve substantially during training.


6.2    Hard versus soft boundary condition enforcement

The  composite  ansatz  ˆx(t)  =ϕ(t) +ψ(t)F                             x(t;θ     x)  enforces  all  four  boundary  conditions  of
problem(P)exactly, independently of the network parameters.  The benefit of this construction
is visible in Figure 5: the pointwise displacement error collapses to machine precision att= 0 and
t=T, and the terminal constraints reported in Table 2 are satisfied identically.  In contrast, the
control approximation ˆu(t) is the raw network output and is not constrained at the endpoints.
The largest absolute error in the control accordingly occurs att= 0, where the magnitude of the
optimal control is greatest and the approximation enjoys no structural support from the ansatz.

This asymmetric design choice is intentional.  In the problem considered here, the state is sub-
ject to explicit boundary conditions, whereas the control admits no natural endpoint constraint.
Extending the hard-enforcement strategy to the control would require either the introduction
of  artificial  endpoint  conditions  that  are  not  present  in  the  original  problem  formulation,  or
the construction of problem-specific ansatz functions whose role and motivation are less easily
generalized.  The trade-off between accuracy at the endpoints and faithfulness to the original
problem formulation is itself a useful pedagogical observation, and extending the present frame-
work  to  richer  classes  of  constraints  –  such  as  inequality  bounds  on  the  control,  or  terminal
cost functionals with no terminal state constraint – remains an interesting direction for further
investigation.


6.3    Approximation hierarchy and the cost of derived quantities

The  pointwise  errors  of  Table  3  exhibit  a  clear  hierarchy  in  which  the  directly  approximated
displacement is the most accurate, the velocity obtained by automatic differentiation through
the ansatz is approximately one order of magnitude less accurate, and the independently approx-
imated control is yet another order of magnitude less accurate.  This hierarchy is a consequence
of two distinct mechanisms.  First, derivatives of a neural approximation  ˆx(t) are typically less
accurate than the approximation  ˆx(t) itself, since the training loss applies pressure on the ap-
proximation but not directly on its derivatives.  Second, the control network operates without
the structural support of the ansatz, and is therefore the least constrained of the two networks
in problem(P).

This  hierarchy  has  practical  implications  for  problem  formulations  in  which  the  quantities  of
primary interest are not the directly approximated ones.  In tracking problems, for example, the
cost functional may depend explicitly on derivatives of the state, in which case the formulation


                                                           17
studied here would impose an accuracy penalty on the most critical quantity.  Reformulations
in  which  both  the  state  and  its  derivatives  are  independently  approximated  –  at  the  cost  of
additional  networks  and  additional  loss  terms  –  have  been  investigated  in  the  recent  PINN
literature and may be appropriate in such cases [Barry-Straume et al., 2025].


6.4    Computational cost and the question of competitiveness

The wall-clock training time reported in Section 5.6 indicates that the PINN is two orders of
magnitude slower than PMP shooting and one order of magnitude slower than the trapezoidal
collocation NLP on this benchmark.  This finding is not, on its own, an argument against PINN
methods.   It  is  rather  an  acknowledgment  that  the  benchmark  is  a  setting  in  which  classical
methods are already at their most efficient:  a linear-quadratic problem of low dimension and
short horizon, with a smooth unique optimum and exactly two terminal constraints [Bryson and
Ho, 1975, Rao, 2009].  Under such conditions, neither shooting nor collocation faces any of the
difficulties for which PINN formulations were originally introduced.

The genuine question is not whether PINNs outperform classical methods on problems for which
classical  methods  are  already  optimal,  but  whether  they  remain  applicable  in  regimes  where
classical  methods  become  difficult  or  impractical  to  deploy.   Several  such  regimes  have  been
identified in the literature.  PINN formulations naturally accommodate sparse or noisy observa-
tions through additional data-fidelity loss terms [Raissi et al., 2019, Karniadakis et al., 2021], do
not require the derivation of adjoint equations for inverse or parameter-identification problems
[Khimin et al., 2024], scale gracefully to high-dimensional state spaces in which traditional col-
location becomes intractable, and integrate seamlessly with end-to-end differentiable pipelines
[Wang and Yu, 2025, Wang et al., 2026].  None of these advantages is exercised by the benchmark
of the present work,  which was selected to maximize interpretability rather than to showcase
the strengths of the PINN paradigm.


6.5    Limitations and scope of the present study

Several  limitations  should  be  acknowledged.   The  benchmark  is  linear,  scalar,  finite-horizon,
and admits a smooth and unique optimum; none of these properties holds in many applications
of  practical  interest.   The  weighting  parameterλ                     phys  is  fixed  by  inspection  rather  than  cho-
sen adaptively, and the training procedure relies on a standard two-phase Adam plus L-BFGS
strategy without architectural innovations such as residual blocks, Fourier features, or domain
decomposition.  A single random seed is used to produce the results reported here;  while the
qualitative behaviour is robust across seeds, no systematic study of training variability is under-
taken.  Finally, the collocation grid of the PINN, the collocation grid of the NLP, and the dense
reference grid used for error evaluation are all uniform, and no investigation of non-uniform or
adaptive grid placement is reported.  Each of these limitations defines a natural direction for
further investigation.
The contribution of this work is therefore best understood as a transparent and reproducible
benchmark study rather than a methodological advance.  Its value lies in establishing a clear


                                                          18
bridge  between  the  classical  optimal  control  literature  and  the  rapidly  growing  literature  on
direct PINN formulations for constrained optimization [Barry-Straume et al., 2025, Zhang et al.,
2026, Schiassi et al., 2024], in a setting where every numerical claim can be independently verified
against an analytically interpretable reference.  The companion Colab notebook is intended to
lower  the  barrier  to  entry  for  practitioners  who  wish  to  explore  PINN-based  optimal  control
without  first  mastering  the  full  machinery  of  adjoint  methods  and  two-point  boundary  value
problems.


7    Conclusion

This  work  has  presented  a  transparent  and  reproducible  benchmark  study  of  a  direct  dual-
network Physics-Informed Neural Network formulation for the optimal control of a mass–spring–
damper system.  The classical optimal control problem was formulated explicitly, solved by two
independent classical methods – Pontryagin’s Minimum Principle with single shooting, and di-
rect transcription through trapezoidal collocation – and reformulated as a constrained optimiza-
tion problem to be solved by a pair of feedforward neural networks.  Hard boundary condition
enforcement on the state was achieved through a composite ansatz built from a cubic polynomial
and a quadratic mask, while the control was approximated by an unconstrained network.  The
composite loss combined a physics residual at the collocation points with a trapezoidal approx-
imation  of  the  cost  functional,  weighted  by  a  single  scalar  hyperparameter  selected  by  direct
inspection.

On the benchmark studied here, the PINN approximation reproduces the classical optimal cost
to  four  significant  digits,  satisfies  the  terminal  state  constraints  exactly  by  construction,  and
produces pointwise state and control errors that fall within the spread of the two classical refer-
ences.  Training time on a standard Colab CPU runtime is approximately two minutes and is two
orders of magnitude larger than the cost of the classical methods on the same problem.  These
findings establish that direct PINN formulations can reach classical-grade accuracy on a bench-
mark optimal control problem without any modification of the basic physics-informed training
framework, and without the explicit derivation of adjoint equations or two-point boundary value
problems.

The contribution of the present work is methodological clarity rather than methodological nov-
elty.   The  benchmark  was  deliberately  selected  to  admit  verifiable  classical  references  and  to
expose the essential ingredients of a direct PINN-based optimal control formulation in a setting
where each design choice can be examined in isolation.  The companion Google Colab notebook,
all numerical results, and all figures are made available to support reproduction, extension, and
educational use of the framework.  Natural directions for further investigation include nonlinear
and higher-dimensional dynamics, inequality constraints on the control, adaptive loss weighting
and  collocation  strategies,  and  problem  formulations  in  which  the  classical  adjoint  approach
becomes  genuinely  difficult  to  deploy.   In  such  regimes,  the  qualitative  advantages  of  direct
PINN-based optimization – avoidance of adjoint derivations, natural handling of partial obser-
vations, and seamless integration with differentiable pipelines – are expected to translate into


                                                           19
practical competitiveness with classical methodologies.


Code and Data Availability


This  work  does  not involve  experimental  or  observational  datasets.  All  results are  generated
computationally  from  the  differential  equation  (1),  the  boundary  conditions  of  problem(P),
and the parameter values of Table 1.  To guarantee full reproducibility, the following materials
are provided.


Source code.The complete Python/PyTorch implementation is provided as a single Jupyter
notebook designed for Google Colab.  The notebook mounts Google Drive, creates the output
folders, implements the three solution methods (PMP shooting, trapezoidal collocation, dual-
network PINN), trains the PINN with a fixed random seed, evaluates all three methods on a
common dense reference grid, and produces every figure and table appearing in Section 5.  Each
figure cell is self-contained and reads the saved numerical results from disk, so any single figure
can be regenerated without re-executing the training pipeline.


Computational  artifacts.All  numerical  results  reported  in  Section  5  are  written  to  two
comma-separated values (CSV) files:trajectories.csvcontains the state,  velocity,  control,
and pairwise pointwise errors of the three methods on the dense reference grid of 501 uniformly
spaced points; andloss        history.csvrecords the evolution of the three loss components during
the  Adam  and  L-BFGS  training  phases.   Every  numerical  value  reported  in  the  manuscript
tables can be reproduced from these two files alone.


Archive. The complete codebase, including the notebook and all computational artifacts, is
publicly archived with a permanent DOI via Zenodo [Tahimi, 2026c].

Acknowledgments


During  the  development  of  this  work,  the  authors  used  AI-based  language  models  (Claude,
Anthropic, 2024–2026) as assistive tools for writing, code development, and computational ver-
ification.  All conceptual and scientific decisions — including the choice of benchmark problem,
the design of the dual-network PINN formulation, the selection of validation strategy against two
independent classical references, and the critical discussion of the method’s scope and limitations
— originated with the authors.  All mathematical derivations, numerical values, and computa-
tional results were independently verified by the authors, who assume full responsibility for the
integrity, accuracy, and originality of the submitted work.







                                                         20
References

Jostein Barry-Straume, Arash Sarshar, Andrey A Popov, and Adrian Sandu.  Physics-informed
  neural  networks  for  pde-constrained  optimization  and  control.Computational  Mechanics,
  2025.

Arthur  E  Bryson  and  Yu-Chi  Ho.Applied  Optimal  Control:   Optimization,  Estimation  and
  Control.  Taylor & Francis, 1975.

Salvatore Cuomo, Vincenzo Schiano Di Cola, Fabio Giampaolo, Gianluigi Rozza, Maziar Raissi,
  and Francesco Piccialli. Scientific machine learning through physics–informed neural networks:
  Where we are and what’s next.Journal of Scientific Computing, 92(3):88, 2022.

Abdullah  Farea,  Olli  Yli-Harja,  and  Frank  Emmert-Streib.   Understanding  physics-informed
  neural networks:  Techniques, applications, trends, and challenges.AI, 5(1):1–42, 2024.

George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu
  Yang.  Physics-informed machine learning.Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.

Denis Khimin, Julian Roth, Thomas Wick, and Alexander Henkes.  Optimal control of pdes in
  pytorch using automatic differentiation and neural network surrogates.Archives  of  Compu-
  tational Methods in Engineering, 2024.

Zakariyah K Lawal, H Yassin, Daniel T C Lai, and A Che Idris. Physics-informed neural network
  (pinn) evolution and beyond:  A systematic literature review and bibliometric analysis.Big
  Data and Cognitive Computing, 6(4):140, 2022.

Christian Legaard, Tobias Schranz, Gerald Schweiger, and Jozef Drgona.  Constructing neural
  network  based  models  for  simulating  dynamical  systems.ACM  Computing  Surveys,  56(2),
  2023.

Jacques-Louis Lions.Optimal  Control  of  Systems  Governed  by  Partial  Differential  Equations.
  Springer, 1971.

Kai Luo, Jun Zhao, Yu Wang, Jun Li, Jia Wen, and Jie Liang. Physics-informed neural networks
  for pde problems:  A comprehensive review.Artificial Intelligence Review, 2025.

Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks:
  A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
  differential equations.Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.

Anil V Rao.  A survey of numerical methods for optimal control.Advances in the Astronautical
  Sciences, 135(1):497–528, 2009.

Zhikai Ren, Sheng Zhou, Dong Liu, and Qiang Liu. Physics-informed neural networks:  A review
  of  methodological  evolution,  theoretical  foundations,  and  interdisciplinary  frontiers  toward
  next-generation scientific machine learning.Applied Sciences, 15(3), 2025.




                                                         21
Eduardo Schiassi, Michele De Florio, Heidi Johnston, and Daniele Mortari.  Pontryagin neural
  networks  for  the  class  of  optimal  control  problems  with  integral  quadratic  cost.Aerospace
  Research Communications, 2(1), 2024.

Abdeladhim Tahimi.  Automatic differentiation from scratch:  How pytorch computes gradients
  in physics-informed neural networks.  Submitted to arXiv, 2026a.

Abdeladhim Tahimi.  Physics-informed neural networks:  A didactic derivation of the complete
  training cycle.arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.18481, 2026b.

Abdeladhim  Tahimi.   Companion  Notebook  for  “Dual-Network  PINNs  for  Optimal  Control:
  A Reproducible Benchmark on the Mass–Spring–Damper System”.  Zenodo, version v1.0.0,
  2026c.  URLhttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20404730.

Fredi Tr”oltzsch.Optimal Control of Partial Differential Equations:  Theory, Methods and Ap-
  plications.  American Mathematical Society, 2010.

Rui Wang and Rong Yu.  Physics-guided deep learning for dynamical systems:  A survey. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 2025.

Xiaolong  Wang,  Yang  Dou,  Xiaoyu  Yi,  Yang  Zhang,  Xiaoyu  Li,  and  Bin  Li.   When  optimal
  control meets neural network:  A comprehensive survey. Archives of Computational Methods
  in Engineering, 2026.

Zhen  Zhang,  Shanqing  Liu,  Alessandro  Alla,  Jerome  Darbon,  and  George  Em  Karniadakis.
  Pinns in pde constrained optimal control problems: Direct vs indirect methods.arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2604.04920, 2026.






























                                                        22