       Semi-Automatic Correction of 3D Tubular
   Structure Skeletons via Component-Wise MST
             and Filtered Delaunay Triangulation

                     Ruoxuan Yang1,2,3 and Chuan Li4,5,6*

              1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
                        2T´el´ecom Paris, Palaiseau, France.
             3Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France.
                       4*Sorbonne Universit´e, Paris, France.
                5LIPADE, Universit´e Paris Cit´e, Paris, France.
6T´el´ecom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France.


*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):chuan.li@sorbonne-universite.fr;
           Contributing authors:ruoxuan.yang@telecom-paris.fr;


                                          Abstract
  Skeletonization of tubular structures from 3D imaging is essential for tasks such
  as morphometric analysis, transport or flow simulation, and procedural planning
  in  domains  including  vascular  networks,  plant  root  systems,  and  neural  con-
  nectomes. However, automatic skeleton extraction often introduces topological
  artifacts, such as erroneous connections between nearby branches and fragmented
  centerlines caused by noise or missing data. Correcting these artifacts manually
  can  be  time-consuming  and  error-prone,  especially  when  precise  interaction  is
  required.
  We  present  a  semi-automatic  correction  method  that  reconstructs  a  plausible
  centerline connection from minimal user input. Given a user-selected source and
  target point, our method traces a path by combining (i) component-wise mini-
  mum spanning trees for stable local propagation and (ii) a filtered 3D Delaunay
  edge graph for bridging gaps and handling ambiguous junctions. Candidate steps
  are  ranked  using  a  score  that  accounts  for  direction  continuity,  spatial  prox-
  imity,  component  consistency,  and  target-directed  progress.  The  output  is  an
  ordered polyline (or edge sequence) that can be used as a suggested correction
  and integrated into downstream skeleton post-processing workflows.
  We implement the system in C++ with an interactive viewer based on Libigl and
  demonstrate representative qualitative results on brain vessel datasets, including


                                                1
Fig. 1Typical correction scenarios on a brain-vessel point cloud. Top row: crossing segments. Bottom
row: dotted segments. (a,e) Original point clouds; (b,f) extracted skeletons; (c,g) user-selected source–
target pairs; (d,h) reconstructed connections. Similar artifacts also arise in other tubular structures,
such as plant roots and neuronal arbors.

       correction of typical “crossing” and “dotted” artifacts. While our current valida-
       tion is qualitative, the method is lightweight and serves as a practical building
       block toward more comprehensive interactive correction pipelines in biomedical
       imaging and related domains.

       Keywords:3D tubular structures, skeleton correction, interactive editing, Delaunay
       triangulation, minimum spanning tree, centerline reconstruction


1  Introduction

Computer technologies are integral to modern science and engineering, enabling anal-
ysis  in  fields  ranging  from  medicine  to  agriculture  and  neuroscience.  A  key  area  of
research across these domains is the extraction and analysis of 3D tubular structures.
These include, for example, blood vessels [1] and bronchial trees [2] in medical imag-
ing, plant root systems [3,4] and tree architectures [5] in botany, and the intricate
networks of neuronal arbors within neural connectomes [6,7] (see Figure2). Owing
to their narrow, elongated geometries, these structures are commonly represented as
centerline skeletons. Such representations facilitate diverse downstream tasks, includ-
ing fluid dynamics or nutrient transport simulation [8,9], morphometric analysis in
vascular branching [10], root system architecture [11], or neuronal morphology [6], and
guidance for interventions [12].
    A  wide  range  of  automatic  methods  have  been  proposed  to  extract  such  skele-
tons  from  volumetric  imaging  data—such  as  MRA  for  vessels,  CT  or  optical  scans



                                                        2
Fig. 2Some examples of tubular structures (a) Reconstruction of complete mouse neurons [13]. (b)
Segmentation of human brain vessel [14]. (c) Bronchial tree models [15]. (d) Segmentation of maize
root [3].

for plant roots, and electron microscopy for neural connectomes. However, these algo-
rithms often struggle with noisy, incomplete, or ambiguous inputs, which are common
in medical scans, complex soil environments for root imaging, and dense neural tissues.
This challenge is further amplified in large-scale datasets typical of modern biomedical
research, agricultural phenotyping, and connectomics, where manual validation and
correction remain major bottlenecks [6,16,17]. To address these limitations, interac-
tive correction tools have been developed, enabling users to manually refine or adjust


                                                       3
algorithmic outputs. Although such tools provide flexibility and intuitive control [16],
they can be tedious to use due to the demand for precise input, and in some cases,
may rely excessively on manual interventions—potentially resulting in anatomically
inconsistent reconstructions.
    In  this  work,  we  address  two  common  failure  modes  in  tubular  structure  skele-
tonization: erroneous connections between distinct segments (referred to as “crossing
segments”, as shown in Figure1(a, b)) and fragmented segment representations result-
ing from data loss or noise (referred to as “dotted segments”, as shown in Figure1
(e,  f)).  We  introduce  a  semi-automatic  correction  framework  that,  given  minimal
user input (e.g., source and target points), leverages the original geometric structure
along with simple topological heuristics to infer and reconstruct anatomically plausi-
ble paths. Our goal is to reduce the burden of manual correction while maintaining the
structural integrity of the underlying tubular structure.Why two endpoints?Many
existing correction interfaces require users to trace the desired centerline by dragging
across fragments or by placing multiple waypoints. While flexible, such interactions
can be tedious and sensitive to missed clicks, particularly in cluttered 3D scenes where
fragments are densely interleaved. Our design targets a complementary point in the
interaction–automation trade-off: users specify the intended connectivity with a min-
imal source–target pair, and the system proposes a data-consistent connection that
follows the local geometry whenever possible. We explicitly focus on two frequent fail-
ure modes—spurious cross-connections and fragmented segments—where the intended
correction is typically well specified by endpoints. We also discuss cases where addi-
tional  guidance  is  needed  (e.g.,  highly  ambiguous  junctions)  and  outline  extensions
such as optional hint points in Section6.

2  Related Work
2.1  Volumetric Data for Tubular Structures
Tubular  structures  such  as  vascular  networks,  plant  roots,  and  neuronal  arbors  are
typically  extracted  from  volumetric  imaging  modalities  including  CT,  MRI,  optical
scans,  and  electron  microscopy.  After  segmentation,  these  structures  are  commonly
represented as centerline skeletons stored in formats such as SWC or derived graph
representations. Our method operates on skeleton point clouds and is agnostic to the
specific volumetric storage format.

2.2  Centerline extraction and skeletonization
Centerline extraction and skeletonization are critical for analyzing 3D tubular struc-
tures, reducing complex geometries to simpler representations that preserve topological
and geometric properties. A foundational method was proposed by Lee et al. [18], intro-
ducing an iterative thinning algorithm that symmetrically erodes surface layers while
preserving  topology,  using  a  decision-tree  framework  for  efficiency.  This  method  is
implemented in libraries such as ITK and scikit-image, and serves as the preprocessing
step in our pipeline.



                                                    4
    Alternative  methods  include  Voronoi-based  techniques  such  as  the  Power  Crust
[19], which operates on point clouds, and contraction-based methods like Mean Cur-
vature Skeletons [20], which rely on curvature flow for producing smooth and robust
skeletons.  The  variety  of  available  approaches  reflects  different  application  require-
ments,  with  no  universally  optimal  solution.  Maintaining  topological  consistency
remains a fundamental challenge in skeletonization.

2.3  Graph-based path searching
Graph-based algorithms have been extensively studied due to their versatility across
a broad range of applications. Classical algorithms such as Kruskal’s [21] and Prim’s
[22]  for  computing  Minimum  Spanning  Trees  (MSTs),  Delaunay  triangulation  [23]
for spatial partitioning, and shortest-path algorithms like Dijkstra’s [24] and A* [25]
form  the  foundation  for  more  advanced,  task-specific  methods  in  pathfinding  and
connectivity analysis.
    These  algorithms  have  been  successfully  applied  to  skeleton-related  tasks.  For
example,  MSTs  are  commonly  used  for  pruning  and  simplifying  complex  skeletal
graphs  while  preserving  essential  connections,  as  demonstrated  in  3D  plant  model-
ing [26]. Delaunay triangulation and Voronoi diagrams play key roles in medial axis
generation [27]. Shortest-path algorithms like Dijkstra’s and A* are widely used for
tracing vessel centerlines in both images and skeletal graphs, including in interactive
tools such as [28].

2.4  Interactive correction tools
Although automatic skeletonization techniques have advanced significantly, complex
or noisy biological data often produce errors that require human correction. Interactive
tools harness human perceptual strengths to refine automatically generated skeletons.
For  example,  Abeysinghe  and  Ju  [28]  proposed  a  method  in  which  users  define  3D
skeleton curves by clicking 2D endpoints on volume views, inspired by the “intelligent
scissors”  paradigm.  Their  system  also  supports  scribbling  directly  on  the  image  to
guide or correct curve generation.
    Comprehensive editing toolkits such as SkeletonLab [29] provide users with opera-
tions to prune extraneous branches, merge nodes, and resample skeletal structures for
uniformity, enabling application-specific adjustments.
    Our  proposed  method  is  closely  related  to  the  work  of  Nigolian  et  al.  [16],  who
developed two interactive correction strategies for addressing artifacts such as “kissing
vessels” and “dotted vessels.” Their system allows users to manually connect segments
by clicking and dragging. While intuitive, this approach can be cumbersome—missing a
single point may require restarting the process. In contrast, our method infers the con-
necting path automatically based on only two user-specified endpoints, streamlining
the correction workflow.







                                                     5
3  Technical Details
3.1  Data
We use brain vessel point cloud data derived from the validation dataset published
in [30], which includes labeled images of 20 healthy volunteers across five age groups.
The original data comes from a publicly available MRA TOF dataset hosted on the
MIDAS data collection website. The matrix and voxel dimensions are 448×448×128
and 0.51×0.51×0.8 mm, respectively. The annotations were created by the authors
of [30], using an initial 2D U-Net pre-segmentation followed by manual correction and
cross-verification by junior raters. The dataset is released in NIfTI format (.nii.gz),
where each volume includes a binary segmentation mask indicating the presence or
absence  of  blood  vessels.  Figure3illustrates  several  representative  slices  from  the
volumetric data.



























Fig. 3Ten selected slices from the input volume. (a) slice index 1, (b) slice index 15, (c) slice index
29, (d) slice index 43, (e) slice index 57, (f) slice index 71, (g) slice index 85, (h) slice index 99, (i)
slice index 113, (j) slice index 128.


    While the primary dataset for validating our implementation is derived from brain
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), the proposed algorithm is designed for gen-
eral  applicability  to  any  skeleton  represented  as  a  3D  point  cloud.  This  includes
skeletons  from  blood  vessels,  plant  roots,  connectomes,  or  other  branching  tubular
networks.

3.2  Performance
On typical inputs (∼60k original points,∼8k skeleton points), our prototype supports
interactive point selection and returns a correction proposal in real time on a consumer
laptop.


                                                      6
3.3  Pre-processing
We first load the volumetric labels in Python as voxel grids, then apply 3D skeletoniza-
tion using theskeletonize           3dfunction from theskimage.morphologymodule. This
step extracts the centerlines of segmented vessels, producing a voxel grid where voxels
with value 1 form a point cloud of the vascular tree. This point cloud is then converted
into physical coordinates (in.xyzorder) and used as input to our algorithm.

3.4  Algorithm Implementation Platform
Our algorithm is implemented in C++ using the Libigl library, which offers efficient
data structures for managing vertices and edges, along with tools for user interaction.
We use the built-in viewer to render the point cloud and allow point selection via mouse
clicks. A graphical menu enables users to invoke algorithmic functions such as propa-
gation and correction. The code is available athttps://github.com/yangruoxuan0516/
ParcoursRecherche.

3.5  User Interaction
Using the Libigl viewer, as shown in Figure4, we display both the original vessel point
cloud and the corresponding skeleton. Users can freely navigate the 3D view, select
source and target points for correction, and initiate path propagation. In the case of
a “dotted vessel” or a “crossing vessel,” as illustrated in Figure1, users can select a
single  source-target  pair  or  multiple  such  pairs.  The  algorithm  is  then  triggered  by
selecting the appropriate function from the menu.

3.6  Main Algorithm
The main algorithm takes the extracted centerline point cloud and a set of 2nuser-
specified points as input, and automatically constructsnplausible vessel paths. Each
ith path uses the 2i th and 2i+1  th points as its source and target, respectively.Graph
definitions.LetV={v                 i}be the set of 3D skeleton points in physical coordinates. We
use two auxiliary graphs: (1) adistance-thresholdneighborhood graphG           δ  = (V,E δ)
where (v i,vj)∈E  δ  iff∥v   i−v j∥<δ, used only to extract connected components via
BFS; (2) a3D Delaunay edge graphG         dt = (V,E  dt), whereE            dt is the 1-skeleton (edge
set) of the Delaunay tetrahedralization ofV. We further define the filtered Delaunay
graphG     τdt = (V,E τdt) withE    τdt ={e∈E           dt :∥e∥<τ}. For each connected component
ofG  δ, we compute a minimum spanning tree (MST) using Euclidean edge weights;
the union over components forms our component-wise MST graphG            mst.

3.6.1  Overview
The full procedure of our semi-automatic vessel tracing method for each source-target
pair  is  shown  in  Figure5and  described  in  Algorithm1.  It  can  be  applied  to  both
“crossing vessels” and “dotted vessels.”




                                                     7
Fig. 4The user interface of our proposed algorithm, implemented with Libigl in C++. The menu
appears on the left by default, and the point cloud is rendered in the center.

3.6.2  Component-wise MST
As described in the pseudocode, when tracing the vessel centerline, if the current point
has only a single unvisited neighbor in the MST graph, we proceed to that neighbor.
Since  our  method  uses  geometric  criteria  to  determine  the  next  step,  we  prefer  to
follow  the  MST  whenever  possible.  This  is  because  MSTs  have  simpler  structures
compared  to  other  graphs,  such  as  Delaunay  triangulations,  and  are  less  prone  to
error—especially  when  the  skeleton  is  noisy  or  non-smooth.  Furthermore,  following
the MST facilitates efficient computation.
    Rather than using a single MST over the entire skeleton point cloud, we first divide
the point cloud into several components based on pairwise distance: two points belong
to the same component only if their distance is below a threshold (heuristically set to
2.5). This is achieved by constructing a distance-aware adjacency list and applying BFS
to extract connected components. The component-wise MSTs inherit the robustness
of traditional MSTs while excluding excessively long edges that are unlikely to belong
to valid vessel paths, thereby reducing potential errors in subsequent steps.

3.6.3  Neighbor Selection in Delaunay Triangulation
If  MST  tracing  is  not  possible—i.e.,  when  an  endpoint  (no  unvisited  neighbors)  or
a  branching  point  (multiple  unvisited  neighbors)  is  reached  in  the  component-wise




                                                     8
Fig.  5An  overview  of  our  semi-automatic  vessel  tracing  process.  (a)  The  source-target  pair  is
selected. (b) Propagation is performed along edges of the component-wise minimal spanning tree. (c)
When an endpoint or branching point is encountered, all Delaunay edges below a length threshold
are evaluated. (d) The best-scoring edge is selected as the next propagation step.

MST—we switch to using filtered Delaunay triangulation edges. Specifically, we con-
sider only those edges shorter than a threshold (heuristically set to 8.0). Each unvisited
neighbor is scored using the following function:

                    S(u|v) =w              tarT(u) +w           compC(u,v)
                                    −w    angA(u,v)−w             lenL(u,v)−w             distD(u,t).                          (1)
    We choose the next step byu ⋆ = arg maxu∈N   dt(v) S(u|v). Each term in the score
function is defined as follows:
•T=1  {u=t}        (Target bonus): Indicator function that equals 1 if the candidate point
   uis the targett, and 0 otherwise. A large positive weight encourages the algorithm
   to select the target point immediately if it is reachable.
•C=1  {u∼v}        (Component bonus): Equals 1 if the candidateuand current pointv
   belong to the same connected component, and 0 otherwise. This prevents premature
   jumps across components.






                                                          9
Fig. 6(a) The minimum spanning tree of the entire point cloud may introduce incorrect connections
due  to  isolated  distant  points.  (b)  Component-wise  minimum  spanning  trees  ignore  overly  long,
unnatural connections; different components are indicated in different colors.
                     ⃗dprev·⃗dvu
•A= arccos          ∥⃗dprev∥·∥⃗dvu∥    (Angle penalty): Penalizes sharp direction changes. The
   vector ⃗dprev  is  estimated  from  the  lastnpoints  in  the  current  path  (n=  4
   heuristically), while ⃗dvu is the direction vector fromvtou.
•L=∥V    u−V v∥(Length penalty): Euclidean distance between the current pointv
   and the candidateu. Shorter steps are preferred to maintain local coherence.
•D=  Dijkstra(u,t)  (Distance  penalty):  Estimated  shortest  path  length  fromuto
   the  targett,  computed  over  the  filtered  Delaunay  graph.  This  encourages  global
   progression toward the goal.
Each  factor  is  weighted  by  a  corresponding  coefficient:w   target,w component,w angle,
wlength, andw       distance. The values used in our implementation are: 1000, 5, 10, 1, and
1
2, respectively, chosen heuristically to balance accuracy and smoothness.
3.6.4  Start Direction Selection
As  mentioned  in  Section3.6.3,  the  path  direction  is  computed  based  on  the  lastn
points.  However,  when  only  the  source  point  is  provided  at  the  beginning,  the  ini-
tial direction is ambiguous—even in the MST, where only two directions are possible.
Therefore, we initiate propagation in both directions from the source point until reach-
ing a terminal or branching point (or the target itself). We then compare the Dijkstra


                                                       10
distances in the Delaunay triangulation from the two resulting endpoints to the tar-
get. The direction with the shorter distance is selected for further propagation, while
the other endpoint is treated as the terminal end of a vessel.

3.7  Parameter Selection
As described in the algorithm, numerous parameters are chosen heuristically, and their
values significantly influence the propagation results. It would be interesting to utilize
annotated data and apply optimization techniques to determine the best parameter
set, or to adapt parameters dynamically based on local geometric conditions. How-
ever, in this work, we assign fixed values based on empirical observations and data
characteristics.

3.7.1  Delaunay Filter Distance
During propagation, when the current point is either a terminal or a branching node
and the MST path cannot be followed, we consider neighbors in the filtered Delaunay
graph as candidates for the next step. The choice of distance threshold determines the
candidate set. If the threshold is too small, the true next node may be disconnected
from the filtered graph and thus excluded from consideration (see Figure7). On the
other hand, a threshold that is too large may introduce incorrect candidates, which
can both outscore the correct one and slow down score computation. Unless otherwise
stated, all distance thresholds are applied in the same coordinate system as the skeleton
point set (physical units after voxel-to-world conversion).
    We  choose  the  threshold  to  ensure  that  each  component  (as  defined  in  Section
3.6.2) remains internally connected.

3.7.2  Number of Previous Points for Direction Estimation
Due to noise in the skeletonization results, we estimate the propagation direction using
the lastnpoints, rather than just the previous one. This strategy mitigates spurious
twists  and  irregularities.  Ifnis  too  small,  it  may  fail  to  smooth  out  noise;  ifnis
too large, the estimated direction may become outdated and unresponsive to recent
changes.
    The current value ofnis fixed, but an adaptive strategy could be beneficial—for
example, reducingnin regions of high curvature to reflect rapid directional changes,
and increasing it in straighter segments to suppress noise.

3.7.3  Score Weights
The scoring function combines multiple criteria (angle, step length, target distance,
etc.), each with its own scale—for instance, angles range within [0,π], whereas point
distances  are  typically  close  to  1.  Therefore,  weights  are  introduced  both  to  nor-
malize  units  and  to  reflect  the  relative  importance  of  different  terms.  For  example,
angle penalties are given more weight than step length penalties, as abrupt directional
changes are generally less desirable than small deviations in distance.



                                                   11
Fig. 7(a) The original point cloud. (b) Delaunay triangulation edges with length<8. (c) Propaga-
tion fails due to insufficient connectivity. (d) Edges with length<15. (e) Propagation succeeds with
proper connection. (f) Edges with length<24. (g) Propagation selects an incorrect path due to a
smaller turning angle.

    Exploring different parameter combinations or formulating a learning-based opti-
mization  to  tune  them  would  be  promising  future  work.  However,  due  to  time
constraints and the lack of annotated data, we leave this for future exploration.

4  Experiments & Evaluation

We  evaluate  our  method  on  multiple  cases  of  “crossing  vessels”  and  “dotted  ves-
sels” identified within the brain vessel dataset. Representative examples are shown in
Figure8. The left column displays the original point cloud, the middle column shows
the filtered Delaunay triangulation edges, and the right column presents the propa-
gation results. We use a default Delaunay filtering thresholdτand only increase it
when the filtered graph becomes disconnected around the user-specified endpoints. In


                                                     12
practice, selecting the smallestτthat preserves intra-component connectivity provides
a reproducible and stable candidate neighborhood, while avoiding overly long edges
that introduce clutter and ambiguous shortcuts.
    As demonstrated in representative cases, our method often reconstructs plausible
connections. We further discuss typical failure modes in6.
    While  the  current  evaluation  focuses  on  a  specific  class  of  tubular  structures,
the  underlying  approach  is  inherently  general  and  designed  to  support  a  wide
range  of  applications.  Future  work  will  include  quantitative  assessments  on  diverse
datasets—such as plant root architectures and skeletons extracted from connectomic
reconstructions—where analogous topological artifacts frequently occur and demand
efficient correction strategies.

5  Qualitative Comparison to Prior Interactive
    Correction

The  proposed  method  is  semi-automatic  and,  compared  to  the  manual  correction
method introduced in [16], aims to reduce interaction effort while providing a com-
parable correction workflow in the two targeted failure modes. In [16], to address the
“kissing  vessel”  problem—where  vessel  1  and  vessel  2  erroneously  share  a  common
branch due to upstream errors, as illustrated in Figure9(left)—the user must click
on one end of vessel 1, drag the cursor to the other end, and release in order to define
a new path for vessel 1 and thereby separate the overlapping vessels.
    To fix a “dotted vessel,” as shown in Figure9(right), the user is required to click
on the first segment, drag the cursor across all disconnected fragments, and release on
the final segment to validate the connection.
    Although these interactions seem intuitive and flexible, they present some limita-
tions. First, they can be tedious and error-prone, particularly in the “dotted vessel”
case, where missing a single segment during dragging can invalidate the entire opera-
tion, requiring the user to repeat the process. Second, the results are highly dependent
on  the  user’s  precision,  which  may  lead  to  deviations  from  the  original  anatomical
geometry—e.g., in the “kissing vessel” case, if the user fails to click and release near
the shared segment, the newly created path may diverge from the intended vessel.
    In contrast, our proposed semi-automatic method combines flexibility with geomet-
ric fidelity. While users can still intervene, the automatic propagation process reduces
manual workload and ensures consistency with the underlying data. For both “crossing
segments” (where two separate segments intersect and form a topological loop—similar
in spirit to “kissing vessels”) and “dotted segments,” the user only needs to select a
source and target point at either end of the desired connection. The algorithm then
computes  a  plausible  path  that  either  separates  the  loop  (in  the  case  of  ”crossing
segments”) or reconnects the disjoint segments (in the case of ”dotted segments”).
    Importantly, the algorithm operates on the geometric features of the skeleton point
cloud and outputs an ordered polyline (edge sequence) that can be accepted by the
user and integrated into downstream skeleton editing workflows.





                                                    13
Fig. 8(a), (d), (g), (j): Original point cloud. (b), (e), (h), (k): Selected source-target pairs. (c), (f),
(i), (l): Resulting connections.


                                                                 14
Fig. 9Illustration of INVANER tool usage. Left: separating ”kissing vessels” by dragging across the
shared segment. Right: reconnecting ”dotted vessels” by dragging over all disconnected segments. [16]
















Fig. 10The complete workflow, consisting of automatically generated results followed by manual
corrections augmented with semi-automatic methods.
6  Observations & Future Works

Due to time constraints, the proposed method still possesses several limitations. First
of all, although it theoretically requires less user interaction and demonstrates greater
efficiency, a dedicated user study is necessary to evaluate its real-world performance.
Furthermore,  annotated  datasets  from  various  domains—including  clinical  vascular
imaging, agricultural root scans, and large-scale connectomic reconstructions—must
be acquired to quantitatively assess the algorithm’s accuracy and robustness across
diverse tubular structures.
    Second, the current implementation remains a prototype and is not yet integrated
into a complete workflow. Ideally, we hope to incorporate it as a post-processing step
after the automatic skeletonization, assisting manual correction as illustrated in the
overall processing pipeline shown in Figure10.




                                                     15
    Third, in certain edge cases—such as when the topological structure between the
chosen  source  and  target  points  is  overly  complex,  as  illustrated  in  Figure11—the
algorithm may fail and generate incorrect results. A more systematic collection of fail-
ure cases is needed for comprehensive evaluation. Furthermore, improvements to the
propagation criteria and implementation of robust error-handling mechanisms remain
necessary.




























Fig. 11(a) The selected source point is at the lower end of the red path. The target point, located
in the upper part of the image, is not reached. (b) The green circle highlights the key decision point
where propagation goes in the wrong direction due to a smaller angle. (c) Delaunay triangulation
edges are cluttered near the error region.


    In  this  particular  example,  the  path  is  mistakenly  guided  to  the  left  instead  of
the  intended  right  direction  at  the  decision  point  marked  by  the  green  circle.  This
misdirection primarily occurs because the turning angle toward the incorrect path is
smaller.
    As a result, several aspects remain open for future exploration. First, as discussed
in Section3.7, the parameters used in the algorithm could be more rigorously opti-
mized—either by formulating a formal optimization problem with annotated data or
by dynamically adapting parameter values based on local data characteristics.
    Second,  annotated  datasets  must  be  acquired  to  quantitatively  assess  the  algo-
rithm’s  accuracy.  Moreover,  a  well-designed  user  study  is  essential  to  evaluate  the
efficiency of the method and its effectiveness in facilitating skeleton correction.
    Finally, if the approach proves robust and reliable, it would be valuable to inte-
grate  it  into  a  comprehensive  skeleton  correction  workflow.  For  instance,  as  in  the
connectome correction system proposed by Dorkenwald et al. [6], our method could
augment large-scale interactive annotation tools and enhance user experience.



                                                      16
7  Conclusion




































Fig. 12(a) The Delaunay triangulation edges with length<4. (b) Edges with length<8. (c) Edges
with length<12. (d) Edges with length<16.


    We  proposed  a  semi-automatic  correction  algorithm  for  skeletons  of  3D  tubular
structures that balances minimal user interaction with geometric and topological rea-
soning. By combining component-wise MST-based propagation with filtered Delaunay
triangulation heuristics, our method effectively reconstructs morphologically plausible
paths from sparse user inputs. Qualitative evaluations on brain vessel datasets demon-
strate  the  framework’s  ability  to  resolve  common  skeletonization  artifacts  such  as
“crossing segments” and “dotted segments”. The underlying principles suggest appli-
cability to other complex networks like vascular structures, root systems and neural
connectomes. Although the current implementation lacks full workflow integration and
large-scale quantitative validation across these diverse domains, it provides a robust
and  efficient  foundation  for  future  interactive  analysis  tools  in  biomedical  imaging,
plant sciences, and neuroinformatics, facilitating more accurate and efficient research
on various tubular systems.
References

 [1]Kirbas,  C.,  Quek,  F.:  A  review  of  vessel  extraction  techniques  and  algorithms.
      ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)36(2), 81–121 (2004)


                                                    17
 [2]Selvan,  R.,  Petersen,  J.,  Pedersen,  J.H.,  Bruijne,  M.:  Extraction  of  airway
      trees using multiple hypothesis tracking and template matching. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1611.08131 (2016)

 [3]Zeng, D., Li, M., Jiang, N., Ju, Y., Schreiber, H., Chambers, E., Letscher, D.,
      Ju, T., Topp, C.N.: Toporoot: a method for computing hierarchy and fine-grained
      traits of maize roots from 3d imaging. Plant methods17, 1–17 (2021)

 [4]Jiang,  N.,  Floro,  E.,  Bray,  A.L.,  Laws,  B.,  Duncan,  K.E.,  Topp,  C.N.:  Three-
      dimensional  time-lapse  analysis  reveals  multiscale  relationships  in  maize  root
      systems with contrasting architectures. The Plant Cell31(8), 1708–1722 (2019)

 [5]Raumonen, P., Kaasalainen, M.,     ˚Akerblom, M., Kaasalainen, S., Kaartinen, H.,
      Vastaranta, M., Holopainen, M., Disney, M., Lewis, P.: Fast automatic precision
      tree  models  from  terrestrial  laser  scanner  data.  Remote  Sensing5(2),  491–520
      (2013)

 [6]Dorkenwald,  S.,  Schneider-Mizell,  C.M.,  Brittain,  D.,  Halageri,  A.,  Jordan,  C.,
      Kemnitz, N., Castro, M.A., Silversmith, W., Maitin-Shephard, J., Troidl, J., et
      al.: Cave: Connectome annotation versioning engine. bioRxiv (2023)

 [7]Dorkenwald, S., Matsliah, A., Sterling, A.R., Schlegel, P., Yu, S.-C., McKellar,
      C.E., Lin, A., Costa, M., Eichler, K., Yin, Y.,et al.: Neuronal wiring diagram of
      an adult brain. Nature634(8032), 124–138 (2024)

 [8]Antiga,  L.,  Piccinelli,  M.,  Botti,  L.,  Ene-Iordache,  B.,  Remuzzi,  A.,  Steinman,
      D.A.:  An  image-based  modeling  framework  for  patient-specific  computational
      hemodynamics.  Medical  &  biological  engineering  &  computing46,  1097–1112
      (2008)

 [9]Olufsen,  M.S.,  Peskin,  C.S.,  Kim,  W.Y.,  Pedersen,  E.M.,  Nadim,  A.,  Larsen,
      J.:  Numerical  simulation  and  experimental  validation  of  blood  flow  in  arteries
      with  structured-tree  outflow  conditions.  Annals  of  biomedical  engineering28,
      1281–1299 (2000)

[10]Bullitt, E., Gerig, G., Pizer, S.M., Lin, W., Aylward, S.R.: Measuring tortuosity
      of the intracerebral vasculature from mra images. IEEE transactions on medical
      imaging22(9), 1163–1171 (2003)

[11]Siddiqui,  M.N.,  L´eon,  J.,  Naz,  A.A.,  Ballvora,  A.:  Genetics  and  genomics  of
      root system variation in adaptation to drought stress in cereal crops. Journal of
      Experimental Botany72(4), 1007–1019 (2021)

[12]Krissian,  K.,  Malandain,  G.,  Ayache,  N.,  Vaillant,  R.,  Trousset,  Y.:  Model-
      based detection of tubular structures in 3d images. Computer vision and image
      understanding80(2), 130–171 (2000)



                                                     18
[13]Zhang, L., Huang, L., Yuan, Z., Li, A., Wang, Y., Liu, S., Yang, Q., Gong, H.,
     Peng, H.: Collaborative augmented reconstruction of 3D neuron morphology in
     mouse and human brains. Nature Methods21(10), 1936–1946 (2024)https://doi.
     org/10.1038/s41592-024-02401-8

[14]Ghaffari,  M.,  Hsu,  C.-Y.,  Schneller,  B.,  Zhou,  J.,  Alaraj,  A.,  Linninger,  A.:
     Automatic  and  patient-specific  reconstruction  of  the  cerebral  vasculature,  csf
     spaces  and  parenchyma  for  hemodynamic  assessment  of  vascular  pathologies.
     In: CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES (2015).https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.
     1.3400.3043

[15]Gemci,  T.,  Ponyavin,  V.,  Chen,  Y.,  Chen,  H.,  Collins,  R.:  Computational
     model  of  airflow  in  upper  17  generations  of  human  respiratory  tract.  Journal
     of biomechanics41, 2047–54 (2008)https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.12.
     019

[16]Nigolian, V.Z., Igarashi, T., Seo, H.: Invaner: Interactive vascular network edit-
     ing  and  repair.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  Annual  ACM  Symposium  on  User
     Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1197–1209 (2019)

[17]Bucksch, A., Burridge, J., York, L.M., Das, A., Nord, E., Weitz, J.S., Lynch, J.P.:
     Image-based high-throughput field phenotyping of crop roots. Plant physiology
     166(2), 470–486 (2014)

[18]Lee,  T.C.,  Kashyap,  R.L.,  Chu,  C.N.:  Building  skeleton  models  via  3-d  medial
     surface axis thinning algorithms. CVGIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing
     56(6), 462–478 (1994)https://doi.org/10.1006/cgip.1994.1042

[19]Amenta,  N.,  Choi,  S.,  Kolluri,  R.K.:  The  power  crust.  In:  Proceedings  of  the
     Sixth ACM Symposium on Solid Modeling and Applications, pp. 249–266 (2001).
     https://doi.org/10.1145/376957.376986

[20]Tagliasacchi, A., Alhashim, I., Olson, M., Zhang, H.: Mean curvature skeletons.
     Computer  Graphics  Forum31(5),  1735–1744  (2012)https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
     1467-8659.2012.03178.x

[21]Kruskal,  J.B.:  On  the  shortest  spanning  subtree  of  a  graph  and  the  traveling
     salesman problem. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society7(1), 48–
     50 (1956)https://doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9939-1956-0078686-7

[22]Prim, R.C.: Shortest connection networks and some generalizations. Bell System
     Technical Journal36(6), 1389–1401 (1957)https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.
     1957.tb01515.x

[23]Delaunay,  B.:  Sur  la  sph`ere  vide.  Izvestia  Akademii  Nauk  SSSR,  Otdelenie
     Matematicheskikh i Estestvennykh Nauk (6), 793–800 (1934)



                                                    19
[24]Dijkstra, E.W.: A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische
      Mathematik1(1), 269–271 (1959)https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01386390

[25]Hart,  P.E.,  Nilsson,  N.J.,  Raphael,  B.:  A  formal  basis  for  the  heuristic  deter-
      mination  of  minimum  cost  paths.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems  Science
      and CyberneticsSSC-4(2), 100–107 (1968)https://doi.org/10.1109/TSSC.1968.
      300136

[26]Dobbs,   H.,   Peat,   C.,   Batchelor,   O.,   Atlas,   J.,   Green,   R.:   Accurate   3d
      grapevine structure extraction from high-resolution point clouds. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:2502.20417 (2024)arXiv:2502.20417[cs.CV]

[27]Ogniewicz, R., Ilg, M.: Voronoi skeletons: theory and applications. In: Proceed-
      ings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
      Recognition  (CVPR),  pp.  63–69  (1992).https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.1992.
      223226

[28]Abeysinghe,  S.S.,  Ju,  T.:  Interactive  skeletonization  of  intensity  volumes.  Vis
      Comput25, 627–635 (2009)https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-009-0325-5

[29]Barbieri, S., Meloni, P., Usai, F., Spano, L.D., Scateni, R.: An interactive editor
      for curve-skeletons: Skeletonlab. Computers & Graphics60, 23–33 (2016)https:
      //doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2016.08.002

[30]Hilbert,  A.,  Madai,  V.I.,  Akay,  E.M.,  Aydin,  O.U.,  Behland,  J.,  Sobesky,  J.,
      Galinovic, I., Khalil, A.A., Taha, A.A., Wuerfel, J.,et al.: Brave-net: fully auto-
      mated arterial brain vessel segmentation in patients with cerebrovascular disease.
      Frontiers in artificial intelligence3, 552258 (2020)
























                                                    20
Algorithm 1Semi-Automatic Vessel Tracing
Require:Sources, Targett, Skeleton point setV, Component-wise MST edgesE                                                                       mst, Filtered Delaunay
     edgesE           dt
Ensure:Reconstructed path fromstot
 1:InitializeP←[s],visited←{s}
 2:Construct MST adjacency listA           mst
 3:Construct Delaunay adjacency listA           dt
 4:v←s
 5:ifvhas one unvisited neighbor inA              mst then
 6:    Propagate along MST until a junction or endpoint is reached
 7:    Append visited nodes toP
 8:else ifvhas two unvisited neighborsthen
 9:    Propagate along both directions temporarily
10:   Estimate distance totvia Dijkstra
11:   Choose direction with shorter estimated distance
12:   Continue propagation from selected direction
13:end if
14:whilev̸=tandmax iterations not exceededdo
15: N      mst←unvisited MST neighbors ofv
16:  if|N           mst|= 1then
17:   v←N              mst[0]
18:        AppendvtoP, mark as visited
19:  else
20:   N      dt←unvisited Delaunay neighbors ofv
21:       ifN          dt =∅then
22:            break                                                ▷No path found
23:       end if
24:        Initialize best scoreS               ∗←−∞, best candidatev                          ∗←∅
25:       for allu∈N                  dt do
26:      S←0
27:            ifu=tthen
28:        S←S+w                     target
29:            end if
30:            ifuandvin same componentthen
31:        S←S+w                     component
32:            end if
33:        ⃗dprev←direction of lastnsteps
34:        ⃗dvu←unit vector fromvtou
35:      θ←arccos(    ⃗dprev·⃗dvu)
36:      S←S−w                     angle·θ
37:      ℓ←∥V          u−V    v∥
38:      S←S−w                     length·ℓ
39:      d      t←Dijkstra distance fromutot
40:      S←S−w                     distance·d t
41:            ifS >S         ∗ then
42:        S      ∗←S,v        ∗←u
43:            end if
44:       end for
45:       ifv         ∗ =∅then
46:            break                                      ▷No viable candidate
47:       else
48:      v←v            ∗
49:              AppendvtoP, mark as visited
50:       end if
51:  end if
52:end while
53:returnP






                                                                        21