    Projected Inverse Iteration: An Eigenvalue
 Approach to Ground-State Computation with
                       Neural Quantum States

     Hang Zhang1,  Victor Armegioiu1,  Juan Carrasquilla1,
    Siddhartha Mishra1,  Johannes M¨uller2,  Jannes Nys1*†   ,
                               Marius Zeinhofer1*†

                           1ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
                                      2TU Berlin.


         *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):jannys@ethz.ch;
                        marius.zeinhofer@math.ethz.ch;
            †These authors contributed equally to this work.



                                        Abstract
Deep learning offers a powerful approach to quantum many-body problems via
neural  network  wavefunctions,  but  their  optimization  remains  a  severe  bottle-
neck.  Existing  optimization  methods,  including  natural  gradient  descent  and
stochastic reconfiguration, suffer from spectral gap-dependent convergence that
limits their effectiveness on systems fraught with competing orders and nearly
degenerate  ground  states,  such  as  frustrated  magnets  and  strongly  correlated
electron materials. Here, we introduce Projected Inverse Iteration (PII) by re-
framing  the  ground-state  search  as  an  eigenvalue  problem.  PII  achieves  rapid,
gap-insensitive  convergence  while  preserving  the  favorable  polynomial  com-
putational  scaling  of  stochastic  reconfiguration.  Demonstrated  on  challenging
two-dimensional spin systems, including the highly frustratedJ                  1-J 2 model, PII
outperforms  standard  optimization  techniques  and  presents  a  promising  algo-
rithmic strategy for discovering complex quantum states in the presence of small
spectral gaps. More broadly, PII can be interpreted as a novel natural gradient
method tailored for eigenvalue problems, opening up its application to related
challenges within deep learning.







                                             1
1  Introduction

Optimization algorithms are a foundational facet of recent advances in artificial intel-
ligence (AI), alongside novel neural architectures and the scaling of data and compute.
They  are  essential  for  making  large-scale  learning  practically  achievable.  Powerful
optimization methods range from widely used first-order methods like momentum [1]
and  Adam  [2]  to  computationally  heavier  approximate  second-order  methods  like
K-FAC [3], Shampoo [4], and SOAP [5] that offer improved convergence.
    This  paradigm  naturally  extends  to  AI  for  physics  and  chemistry.  A  prominent
example is the use of neural network wavefunctions to solve complex many-body prob-
lems  in  condensed  matter  physics,  nuclear  physics,  and  quantum  chemistry  [6–25].
For most architectures, standard first-order stochastic methods such as Adam are well
known  to  perform  poorly,  making  natural  gradient  schemes  (independently  discov-
ered and coined stochastic reconfiguration [26], or SR) the preferred choice. However,
improving this scheme has become a critical focal point; in the last two years, it has
become apparent that to achieve breakthroughs, progress in neural architectures must
be matched with parallel advancements in optimization methods [13,27–34]. Just as
Adam  revolutionized  the  field  of  deep  learning,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  devel-
opment  of  novel  physics-informed  optimization  schemes  may  be  the  key  to  solving
previously intractable quantum problems.
    In  this  manuscript,  we  focus  on  the  challenge  of  makingeigensolverstractable
for  large-scale  problems  in  quantum  mechanics  far  beyond  the  problems  reachable
with exact methods. In this regime, even state-of-the-art matrix-free methods exhaust
the capacity of the world’s largest supercomputers. We focus on the core eigenvalue
problem of quantum mechanics, the stationary Schr¨odinger equation

                                               ˆH|ψ⟩=E|ψ⟩.                                                   (1)

for a Hamiltonian operator  ˆHand quantum state|ψ⟩with energyE. While the ground
state  approximation  of  Eq.   (1)  is  typically  formulated  as  an  energy  minimization
problem,  here  we  show  that  directly  viewing  it  as  an  eigenvalue  problem  offers  a
powerful new perspective. More precisely, our contributions are the following:
•  We  introduce  Projected  Inverse  Iteration  (PII), adapting classical inverse
  iteration to large-scale quantum systems via a Galerkin projection onto the tangent
  space  of  the  variational  manifold.  We  empirically  demonstrate  PII’s  efficacy  on
  challenging  two-dimensional  spin  systems,  where  it  converges  significantly  faster
  than Stochastic Reconfiguration—the current gold standard—while preserving the
  same favorable computational scaling.
•  We  establish  a  principled  theoretical frameworkfor analyzing the conver-
  gence  of  algorithms  in  ground-state  computations.  Our  analysis  identifies  SR  as
  a Galerkin-projected variant of Riemannian gradient descent, explaining its linear
  convergence rate and severe degradation for closing spectral gaps. In contrast, PII
  explicitly leverages the eigenvalue structure to bypass this bottleneck, providing a
  highly robust and efficient training method for neural network wavefunctions in the
  presence of closing spectral gaps (as illustrated in Figure1).


                                                      2
Fig. 1Visualization of SR (red) and PII (cyan) for the Hamiltonian    ˆH= diag(1,10,0) and a linear
normalized state vector on the sphereS. Figure A visualizes the optimization dynamics on the sphere,
and Figure B shows the corresponding energy error. PII converges in essentially a single step for the
shift valueτ= 10       −8   . SR with learning rateη= 0.1 converges slowly with oscillating iterates, due to
the large eigenvalue spread (Γ = 10) and the small spectral gap (∆ = 1).

    The development of PII in this work can be seen as a specialization of theinfinite-
dimensionalviewpoint on optimization in scientific machine learning proposed in [35].
In this context, infinite-dimensional refers to the choice of inverse iteration as a well-
suited  method  for  solving  Eq.  (1)  over  a  general  function  space,  independent  of  a
parametrization. When we refer to function space or the non-parametric setting, we
always mean the intractably large space, irrespective of it beingC        2N in spin systems, or
the subspace ofL    2(R  3N  ) consisting of anti-symmetric functions in electronic structure.
Consequently, PII applies to general non-linearly parametrized eigenvalue problems.
In fact, in machine learning parlance, PII can be viewed as a novel natural gradient
method that is tailored for the application to eigenvalue problems. We thus anticipate
applications of PII beyond its demonstrated utility in quantum physics.

2  Results

We introduce the core PII algorithm in the next section, and demonstrate its proper-
ties on a benchmark example, as well as on large-scale two-dimensional systems with
important Hamiltonians central to condensed matter physics [7].

2.1  Projected inverse iteration
Consider a variational approximationψ       θ  (typically a neural network [6]) of a quan-
tum state with parametersθ. To solve the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation in
Eq.  (1),  variational  methods  cast  the  problem  into  an  optimization  problem  of  the




                                                       3
energy loss function given by the Rayleigh quotient


                                        minψθ E(ψ  θ) =⟨ψ θ| ˆH|ψ  θ⟩⟨ψ θ|ψ θ⟩ .                                          (2)


The  denominator  translates  the  fact  that  valid  quantum  states  are  normalized
(|  ˆψ⟩=|ψ⟩/∥ψ∥in  theL                               2  norm∥ψ∥=      p⟨ψ|ψ⟩),  i.e.  they  live  on  the  unit  sphere
S={      ˆψ∈H:∥       ˆψ∥= 1}. Hence, the Rayleigh quotient in Eq. (2) is insensitive to the
normalization. The above objective is typically optimized using gradient-based opti-
mization algorithms such as Adam [2,9], K-FAC [3,16], or stochastic reconfiguration
(SR). While successful in many contexts, these minimization methods do not funda-
mentally  exploit  the  underlying  eigenvalue  problem  represented  by  the  Schr¨odinger
equation in Eq. (1).
    To  respect  the  eigenvalue  structure,  we  design  a  projected  version  of  inverse
iteration—the canonical  algorithm in numerical linear algebra  for computing  eigen-
states  given  an  eigenvalue  guess  [36].  The  projection  step  turns  the  intractable
non-parametric inverse iteration scheme into a scalable iterative algorithm similar to a
preconditioned gradient scheme. To translate this approach to the context of ground-
state computations in quantum mechanics, we consider a trial|ψ    k⟩at iterationkand
a shift parameterτthat serves as an approximation of the ground-state energy. In a
non-parametric setting, inverse iteration updates the quantum state via


                                     | ˆψk+1⟩=     ( ˆH−τ       ˆI) −1 | ˆψk⟩∥(   ˆH−τ       ˆI) −1 | ˆψk⟩∥.                                       (3)


We rewrite the above into a Riemannian scheme, iteratively updating the current state
with tangential directions and retracting back to the sphere via normalization. This
yields


               | ˆψk+1⟩= | ˆψk⟩−|d k⟩∥| ˆψk⟩−|d k⟩∥, |d k⟩=|     ˆψk⟩−     ( ˆH−τ       ˆI) −1 | ˆψk⟩⟨ ˆψk|(  ˆH−τ       ˆI) −1 | ˆψk⟩.             (4)


whered     k∈T ψkSis tangent to the current iterate    ˆψk, i.e.⟨d   k| ˆψk⟩= 0. In the exam-
ple in Fig.1, we explicitly depict the update vectord                    0 on the sphere for the first step
(k= 0). At first glance, this reformulation appears impractical. Direct computation of
dk  is infeasible for many-body systems due to the exponential growth of the Hilbert
space, and introducing Riemannian geometry may seem like an unnecessary compli-
cation. However, this geometric perspective is the crucial stepping stone for deriving
a scalable, projected variant. Specifically, our method builds on the realization that
a  Galerkin  projection  of  this  infinite-dimensional  Riemannian  update  onto  the  tan-
gent space of a variational model leads to a highly tractable algorithm. Moreover, this
approach maintains the same polynomial computational scaling as SR per iteration
(for details, see Methods). Galerkin projection turns the inverse iteration update (4)




                                                        4
into a tractable preconditioned gradient scheme in parameter space

                                θk+1   =θ k−Q −1  (θ k) 12∇θE(ψ  θk),                                 (5)

where∇     θE(ψ  θk) is the energy gradient, andQis a preconditioner that can be esti-
mated efficiently with Monte Carlo integration. While we use normalized states in our
notation, our method works equally well for unnormalized states. For details, we refer
to the Methods. The matrixQdepends on the energy shiftτ, and is constructed from
theτ-shifted  Hamiltonian  operator  projected  into  the  tangent  space  of  the  current
iterate  ˆψk. Moreover, for the choiceτ=E(ψ         k), the iteration (3) is known asRayleigh
quotient  iteration, and its equivalent Riemannian formulation in Eq. (4) agrees with
the Riemannian Newton method. We expand on this connection in AppendixH.

2.2  Convergence guarantees
To analyze PII in comparison to SR, we consider their non-parametric formulations.
This setting isolates the underlying dynamics and has the advantage of being agnostic
to  the  specific  parametric  ansatz.  Extending  this  analysis  to  include  neural  quan-
tum states and the effect of Monte Carlo sampling remains an open question beyond
the  scope  of  this  work.  Strictly  speaking,  our  computationally  tractable  algorithms
in  parameter  space  are  Galerkin-projected  and  Monte  Carlo-estimated  variants  of
their functional counterparts. While we refer to them as SR and PII for simplicity,
their underlying non-parametric methods are Riemannian gradient descent and inverse
iteration, see also Methods.
    LetE       0  andE       max  denote the smallest and largest eigenvalues of  ˆH, respectively.
We define the first excited state energy,E 1, as the minimal eigenvalue of  ˆHstrictly
greater  thanE         0.  Our  analysis  explicitly  covers  degenerate  ground  states.  For  any
iterative sequence  ˆψk converging to a target ground state  ˆψ∗, we analyze the functional
convergence rateρ<1 for which∥            ˆψk− ˆψ∗∥2≤cρ k for a constantcindependent ofk.
The convergence of SR as a functional algorithm is governed by the rate
                                                1−   1E1−E    0    .                                         (6)
                                       ρSR =          2 Emax−E    0

For concreteness this rate is stated forη= 1/(2(E                  max−E    0)). Crucially, the convergence
rate of SR in Eq. (6) deteriorates when the spectral spread Γ =E        max−E    0  is large
or the spectral gap ∆ =E    1−E    0  is small. In these cases, SR converges with a slow
linear rate, as illustrated in Figure1or in more detail in the AppendixK. Moreover,
SR possesses a critical step-size threshold ofη= 1/(E             max−E    0) beyond which the
algorithm diverges, see Figure [B]. The sensitivity of the SR step-size to the spectrum
(η<Γ −1  ) requires a manual step-size tuning for every quantum system.
    Inverse iteration, on the other hand, always uses a step-size ofη= 1 and converges
for all shift parametersτ <          E1+E    02      at the rate
                                          1− E1−E    0   =E0−τ      .                                    (7)
                                  ρII =          E1−τ             E1−τ


                                                       5
Fig. 2  Spectral-gap dependence distinguishes PII from SR. A,Optimization trajectories for
the 4×4 TFIM in a regime with a small spectral gap (h/J= 2, ∆ = 0.015), plotted as relative error
εversus iteration for PII, SR and Adam, whereε=|(E                    ViT−E   ED)/E  ED|. All runs use the same
number of Monte Carlo samples (M= 32,768) and a positive real-valued ViT ansatz (4 layers, hidden
dimensiond= 20, andh= 2 heads). PII uses a learning rateη= 1.0 and Tikhonov regularization
λ= 0.01, whereas SR usesη= 0.01 andλ= 10                    −4   . Adam is included as a standard first-order baseline,
with  its  best  learning  rateη=  0.01.B,The  same  comparison  in  a  larger-gap  regime  (h/J=  4,
∆ = 3.25). PII shows little gap dependence, whereas SR slows down for the smaller gap and Adam
remains at higher relative error over the plotted iterations.

Forτ=E          0+α(E        1−E    0) we obtain the convergence rateρ        II =  α1−α     thereby removing all
dependency on the spectrum of  ˆH. Further, the convergence factorρ                II in Eq. (7) can be
made arbitrarily fast asτ→E           0, see FigureK5. In the limitτ→E                                   0, inverse iteration
converges  typically  in  a  single  step  as  illustrated  in  Figure1.  Nevertheless,  using  a
valueτ̸=E              0 induces a slowdown of convergence, which we demonstrate in FigureK6.
However, we will demonstrate in the next sections thatτ <E         0 can serve as a reliable
regularization  when  used  with  stochastic  Monte  Carlo  estimation  of  the  quantities
involved. Whenτ     k =E(ψ    k) is chosen adaptively as the current energy estimate, the
method is known as the eigensolver Rayleigh quotient iteration and converges cubically
in the vicinity of the ground state [36]. While the convergence analysis in this section
is for the non-parametric setting, we experimentally show that these properties to a
large extent carry over to expressive variational models. In practice, this means PII is
much more robust to small gaps compared to SR. In all our experiments in the next
section, including linear models, full Hilbert sum computations, and highly nonlinear
deep neural networks on large 10×10 models with Monte Carlo, we clearly observe
significantly less gap sensitivity in agreement with the theory.
    In certain applications, extremely small spectral gaps can occur. For any method
to resolve these, one needs access to highly accurate energies, gradients, and precon-
ditioners beyond those achievable with Monte Carlo estimation. Resolving such gaps
remains out of reach for both SR and PII. However, PII can resolve moderately small
gaps much better than SR.




                                                          6
2.3  Effect of spectral gap on convergence
In  this  section,  we  experimentally  confirm  the  favorable  convergence  properties  of
PII  on  systems  with  small  spectral  gaps,  both  for  a  linearized  state-vector  setting
and a nonlinearly parametrized neural-network ansatz. For the linear state vector, we
visualize the behavior of SR for a moderately small spectral gap in Fig.1. The effect
of further shrinking the gap is visualized in AppendixKin FiguresK5andK7. We
observe that closing spectral gaps lead to a slow oscillatory behavior of the iterates in
Hilbert space. This is the familiar behavior of a gradient descent method in a narrow
loss valley, bouncing rapidly between the valley walls. This interpretation is further
strengthened through the analysis of SR as a projected Riemannian gradient descent
method in section3.1. PII, on the other hand convergence in a single step for all these
examples, independent of the gap sizes considered.
    We further benchmark PII against SR and Adam in a parametric setting using a
variational ansatz for a small 4×4 transverse-field Ising model (TFIM), for which the
spectral gap can be evaluated by exact diagonalization. The Hamiltonian is

                                  ˆHTFIM =−J  X         ˆσzi ˆσzj−h X     ˆσxi,                                   (8)

                                                   ⟨i,j⟩              i

where⟨i,j⟩denotes nearest neighbours, and               ˆσx,y,z are the Pauli matrices.
    Figure2compares the convergence speed in a coupling regime with different gap
sizes ∆ =E    1−E    0. We consider the gaps (small) ∆ = 0.015 ath/J= 2, and (large)
∆ = 3.25 ath/J= 4, respectively. The experiments are carried out with a deep neu-
ral network ansatz, in particular a non-linear ViT ansatz [12]. We include Adam as
a widely used adaptive first-order baseline, which relies only on local gradient infor-
mation  and  does  not  use  the  preconditioning  employed  by  SR  or  PII.  For  SR  and
PII,  the  respective  preconditioners  are  regularized  with  a  Tikhonov  regularization1
Q(θ)→Q(θ) +λIwhen taking the inverse in Eq. (5) (see Eq. (29) in Methods). For
fair comparison, we run SR with the largest possible learning rateηand the small-
est possible regularizationλthat allows for a stable optimization (see Supplemental
Material).
    Ath/J=  2,  the  4×4  TFIM  corresponds  to  the  ordered  ferromagnetic  regime
of the two-dimensional model. In the thermodynamic limit, this phase spontaneously
breaks the globalZ            2 spin-flip symmetry, giving two symmetry-related ground states.
On a finite periodic lattice, this degeneracy is lifted by a finite-size spectral gap ∆,
which decreases exponentially with system size. PII reduces the relative error of the
variational  energy  to∼10  −4    within  10  iterations  in  both  regimes  (Fig.2a,b).  By
contrast, SR slows markedly as the gap decreases, requiring substantially more iter-
ations  to  reach  the  same  accuracy.  The  resulting  trajectories  distinguish  an  almost
gap-insensitive optimization regime for PII from a gap-limited regime for SR. These
results indicate that the qualitative conclusions based on theoretical non-parametric
convergence  rates  in  Eqs.  (6)-(7)  persist  for  neural  quantum  states  optimized  with
Monte Carlo sampling.



  1We  will  set  the  units  of  energyJ=  1  everywhere,  and  drop  the  scale  in  SR  learning  rates  and  PII
regularizations for simplicity of notation.

                                                       7
Fig. 3  Shift undershooting stabilizes PII in a quasi-degenerate TFIM.Relative ground-
state energy error versus iteration for the 4×4 TFIM ath/J= 2.A,Without undershooting (τ=E                              0),
Monte Carlo noise prevents PII from converging for small batch sizes (M= 512 andM= 4096).
B,With undershooting (τ= 1.2E             0), trajectories stay stable across batch sizes.C,In the noise-free
full-sum limit, sweepingτ=αE                 0  follows the predicted contractionr  PII, showing a direct trade-off
between robustness and speed. All trajectories useλ= 0.1 andη= 1.0. All results are produced with
a real-valued RBM ansatz (hidden-variable densityα= 4 [6]).

2.4  Effect of the energy shiftτ
Theoretically, the optimal convergence in PII is expected when the shiftτmatches
the  true  ground  state,  i.e.,τ=E             0  in  Eq.  (3).  However,  takingτ < E                 0,  which  we
refer to asundershootingthe energy, can help stabilize the preconditioning at a fixed
Monte  Carlo  budget  per  iteration,  at  the  cost  of  a  reduced  theoretical  convergence
rate in Eq. (7). This approach is different from the standard Tikhonov regularization
approach (λ) also used in SR.
    In Fig.3a,b, we consider the 2D TFIM ath/J= 2 on a 4×4 lattice. Without under-
shooting, i.e.τ=E            0 is the exact ground state energy obtained with ED (Fig.3A), PII
shows rapid convergence, but requires a higher number of Monte Carlo samples for
convergence. ForM= 512 and 4096, the optimization fails, likely to an inaccurately


                                                            8
Fig.  4  PII  acceleration  at  large10×10lattices.Energy  per  site  during  the  optimization,
comparing  SR  and  PII  for  three  canonical  2D  spin- 12  models  on  a  torus:A,TFIM  ath/J=  2;
B,unfrustrated Heisenberg antiferromagnet (J      2  = 0);C,frustratedJ                           1–J  2  model atJ    2/J1  = 0.5.
Stoquastic casesA,Bare optimized with a positive real ViT ansatz (4 layers;d= 20,h= 2), whereas
the frustrated pointC,uses a complex-valued ViT to capture the emergent sign structure (4 layers;
d= 60,h= 10; see Methods). PII usesη= 1.0 with diagonal shift 10                −3    (TFIM),η= 1.0 with shift
10−2    (Heisenberg), andη= 1.0 with shift 10         −1    atJ    2/J1 = 0.5, together with mild overshoot control.

empirical preconditioner in Eq. (5). In contrast, atM= 16384 the method converges
smoothly, indicating effective preconditioning.
    Introducing  mild  undershooting  substantially  improves  the  robustness  of  PII
(Fig.3B): across the same range ofM, PII becomes far less sample-size dependent
and converges reliably even in the low-sample regime. We attribute this stabilization
to improved spectral conditioning of the preconditioner. Increasingτshifts the spec-
trum ofQtowards larger values, which heuristically makes it easier for finite-sample
estimates to retain (approximate) positive semi-definiteness in Eq. (17).
    To  disentangle  this  effect  from  Monte  Carlo  noise,  we  further  evaluate  PII  in  a
noiseless setting by replacing stochastic estimators with a full Hilbert space contraction
(full  sum  for  short).  In  this  deterministic  limit  (see  Fig.3c),  undershooting  is  no
longer  expected  to  provide  a  stability  advantage,  but  still  induces  the  slowdown  of
convergence observed in Eq. (7). Asτmoves away fromE                     0, the ratio approaches unity,
increasingρ                    II  and  weakening  the  per-iteration  contraction.  These  results  expose  a
stability-speed trade-off that can be exploited in PII: undershooting mildly reduces the
convergence speed, but significantly improves numerical robustness under stochastic
estimation of the preconditionerQ.

2.5  Large scale results
We  now  apply  PII  to  a  number  of  large-scale  experiments  far  beyond  the  reach  of
exact  methods  (due  to  a  Hilbert-space  size  of  1030),  and  of  significant  importance
for condensed matter physics [7]. We consider three canonical two-dimensional spin-    12
models on 10×10 square lattices with periodic boundary conditions: the TFIM, the
(unfrustrated)  Heisenberg  antiferromagnet,  and  the  highly  frustratedJ                    1–J  2  model.



                                                           9
The latter reads
                             ˆHJ1–J  2 =J    1X   ˆSi· ˆSj +J    2 X     ˆSi· ˆSj,                             (9)


                                            ⟨i,j⟩                 ⟨⟨i,j⟩⟩

where⟨⟨i,j⟩⟩denotes next-nearest neighbours, andS            i = [ˆσxi, ˆσyi, ˆσzi ]. The Heisenberg
model corresponds toJ    2/J1  = 0 in Eq. (9). Near the frustrated pointJ      2/J1  = 0.5,
the phase diagram in the thermodynamic limit remains highly debated [37–40].
    The TFIM and the Heisenberg Hamiltonian are stoquastic, i.e. can be cast into
a form with real and negative off-diagonal elements. This implies that their ground
states can be chosen real and nonnegative. In contrast, nearJ         2/J1≃0.5 theJ              1–J  2
model develops a nontrivial sign structure and is challenging even for state-of-the-art
ground-state solvers. Capturing the sign structure requires an expressive and highly
non-linear complex-valued ansatzψ     θ. For TFIM ath/J= 2 and the Heisenberg limit
J2/J1 = 0, we use the same positive ViT as in previous experiments. For the highly
frustrated pointJ  2/J1 = 0.5, we use a wider and complex-valued neural network.
    Figure4shows the convergence of PII versus standard SR for the three Hamilto-
nians. PII reaches the target energy in substantially fewer iterations than SR for the
TFIM and Heisenberg benchmarks (Fig.4a,b), which is consistent with SR becoming
spectrum-limited in systems with small energy gaps. On 10×10, SR typically requires
O(10    2) iterations to reach the target energy, whereas PII converges within only a few
dozen iterations (∼20–30) across the same settings.
    We  clarify  that,  in  the  ordered  TFIM,  the  finite-size  splitting  between  the  two
lowest states becomes exponentially small with system size. Because these states form a
quasi-degenerate ground state, resolving them with single-state methods is practically
impossible. Consequently, convergence to the target energy is dominated by the gap
to the next true excited state. When this gap is small, SR enters a gap-limited regime.
Similar effects appear in the Heisenberg antiferromagnet, while in theJ       1-J  2  model,
frustration lifts the quasi-degeneracy and can remain significant for large system sizes:
O(1).

3  Methods
3.1  Riemannian functional optimization perspective
Before describing the projection step that converts II into PII, we first analyze energy
optimization from a Riemannian perspective. We hereby focus on infinite-dimensional
functional updates, or said differently, updates of non-parametric quantum states in
the Hilbert space. The Riemannian gradient of the energyE(              ˆψ) =⟨      ˆψ|H|       ˆψ⟩on the
sphereSreads

                                   gradSE(   ˆψ) = 2(   ˆH−E(         ˆψ)   ˆI)|    ˆψ⟩                                   (10)







                                                      10
Hence, Riemannian gradient descent on the sphere with step-sizeη>0 and retraction
by normalization [41] is given by the recursion


                                  | ˆψk+1⟩= | ˆψk⟩−ηgrad     SE(   ˆψk)∥| ˆψk⟩−ηgrad     SE(   ˆψk)∥ .                                 (11)


In other words, the Riemannian gradient descent update in Hilbert space retracts the
following update direction

                                      |d k⟩=ηgrad       SE(   ˆψk)
                                             = 2η(     ˆH−E(         ˆψk)ˆI)|    ˆψk⟩                                       (12)

back  onto  the  sphereS.  We  will  demonstrate  in  the  next  section  that  SR  can
be  understood  as  a  Galerkin-projected  version  of  this  Riemannian  gradient  descent
scheme.
    We note in passing that the Riemannian energy gradient is the same as the gradient
of the Rayleigh quotient in Eq. (2): grad    SE=∇   ψE. This implies that Riemannian
gradient  descent  agrees  with  gradient  descent  on  the  Rayleigh  quotient  up  to  the
retraction step.

3.2  Galerkin projections and inverse iteration
While the previous section considered functional updates, we now study these updates
in  a  basis  determined  by  a  parametrized  quantum  state.  For  a  normalized  neural
network wavefunction  ˆψθ  =ψ θ/∥ψ  θ∥with parametersθ∈R            P , we consider its local
linearization given by

                                     Vθ = span{∂     θi ˆψθ}Pi=1 ⊂T ψθS,                                    (13)

which  changes  throughout  the  optimization.  As  detailed  below,  we  obtain  PII  and
SR by orthogonally projecting their functional schemes onto these finite-dimensional
spaces. Any solutionξ∈R         P  to the linear system
                                 X    b(∂  θi ˆψθ,∂θj ˆψθ)ξ j =b(∂   θi ˆψθ,dk)                                 (14)


                                   j

represents the orthogonal projection of|d  k⟩with respect to the inner productbinto
the spaceV    θ  in the generating system∂      θ1 ˆψθ,...,∂θ1 ˆψθ. Such a projection is called a
Galerkin projection.
    To derive PII from II, we consider the inner productb(v,w) =⟨v|                  ˆH−τ       ˆI|w⟩and
project the inverse iteration directiond       k in Eq. (4) ontoV   θ with respect to the inner
productb. This choice comes from the fact that if we choosew=d          k, the intractable
( ˆH−τ       ˆI) −1    in the functional II update in Eq. (4) is annihilated. This will allow us to
make II tractable through projection. Computingbandd             k  in the generating system



                                                        11
ofV  θ yields

                         b(∂  θi ˆψθ,∂θj ˆψθ) =⟨∂  θi ˆψθ| ˆH−τI|∂    θj ˆψθj⟩=Q(θ)     ij                      (15)
                             b(∂  θi ˆψθ,dk) =⟨∂  θi ˆψθ| ˆH−τI|d    k⟩=    12∂θiE(ψ  θ)                     (16)

where we introduced the matrices

                                            Q(θ) =H(θ)−τS(θ)                                             (17)
                                          S(θ)   ij =⟨∂  θi ˆψθ|∂ θj ˆψθ⟩                                           (18)
                                          H(θ)   ij =⟨∂  θi ˆψθ| ˆH|∂  θj ˆψθ⟩                                       (19)

which  can  be  estimated  efficiently  with  Monte  Carlo  sampling,  as  we  demonstrate
in the next section. TheS-matrix in Eq. (18) is commonly referred to as theGram
matrix, overlap  matrixorquantum  geometric  tensor[42]. TheH-matrix represents
the discretization of the Hamiltonian  ˆHand appears also in e.g. the linear method [43].
For PII, we obtain the linear systemQ(θ)ξ=                           12∇θE(   ˆψθ), clarifying the preconditioner
and parameter-update rule of PII in Eq. (5).
    We can also derive SR from a similar Galerkin-projection viewpoint. For SR the
direction is the Riemannian gradient|d k⟩= grad  SE(   ˆψk) = 2( ˆH−E(         ˆψk))|    ˆψk⟩, and we
use theL      2 inner product instead ofb:b(v,w) =⟨v|w⟩. This yields the familiar formulas

                                         ⟨∂ θi ˆψθ|∂ θj ˆψθ⟩=S(θ)     ij
                                              ⟨∂ θi ˆψθ|d k⟩=∂  θiE(ψ  θ),

Any  solutionξ∈R         P  to  the  linear  systemS(θ)ξ =∇           θE(ψ  θ)  now  represents  the
orthogonal  projection  of  the  Riemannian  gradient  intoV  θ  with  respect  to  theL      2
inner  product.  This  shows  that  SR  is  in  fact  anL     2  projected  Riemannian  gradient
descent scheme. Note that the standardL                  2 inner product lacks information about the
Hamiltonian spectrum. This lies at the core of the struggling behavior of SR in certain
spectral regimes.
    Finally,  our  Galerkin  viewpoint  also  gives  insight  into  the  properties  of  the
Rayleigh-Gauss-Newton method [29] as a Riemannian method. The latter can now be
understood as follows: 2bis the Riemannian Hessian of the energy, whereb(v,w) =
⟨v|    ˆH−E(ψ)             ˆI)|w⟩. When discretized, it becomes the matrixH(θ)−E(θ)S(θ).
    In  our  formalism,  we  can  categorize  the  existing  optimization  schemes  in  terms
of the corresponding function space optimizer and eigensolver, as shown in Table1.
Hence, to summarize the procedure to produce a parameter update rule from a given
eigensolver (and therefore reproduce Table1) goes as follows: (i) a chosen eigenvalue
solver yields a functional update direction|d        k⟩, which (ii) induces a choice for the inner
productb, in order to makeb(v,d       k) tractable. Through (iii) Galerkin projections, we
obtain a linear equation to define a parameter update rule for variational models.





                                                           12
        Parameter                   Function space                 Inner product                    Eigensolver
        algorithm                      optimizer                         b(v,w)

    Projected inverse                   Globalized                   ⟨v|    ˆH−τ       ˆI|w⟩       Shifted inverse
  iteration (this work)          Riemannian Newton                                                     iteration
                                      method onS
          Rayleigh               Riemannian Newton                 ⟨v|    ˆH−E(ψ)|w⟩             Rayleigh quotient
   Gauss-Newton [29]                  method onS                                                       iteration

         Stochastic                  RiemannianL                       2  ⟨v|w⟩                    Power iteration
      reconfiguration            gradient descent onS

  Wasserstein quantum            Wasserstein gradient                        –                              –
     Monte Carlo [28]                     descent
Table 1Correspondence of optimization algorithms across parameter space, function space, and
—where applicable—eigensolvers. We expand on the interpretation of SR as power iteration in
AppendixF.


3.3  Monte Carlo estimators
Our PII approach is efficient due to the availability of efficient Monte Carlo estimators
of  theSandHmatrix  in  Eqs.  (18)  and  (19).  We  focus  on  unnormalized  complex-
valued wave functionsψ       θ∈Cwith real parametersθ∈R              P , but the method generalizes
to other cases. We generate a set ofMsamples{x                          (m) }Mm=1   , distributed according to
the  Born  probabilityp θ(x)  =|       ˆψ2θ|.  The  energy  is  obtained  in  the  standard  way  as
E=E   p [EL] with the local energyE     L(x) = [Hψ  θ](x)/ψ   θ(x). The estimators for the
energy gradient and the matricesSandHread


                      ∂θiE= 2 ReE    p [(J i−E p [Ji])∗(E L−E)     ]                                        (20)
                              ≈(O ⊤·e)  i                                                                             (21)
                    S(θ)   ij = ReE  p [(J i−E p [Ji])∗(J j−E p [Jj])]                                    (22)
                              ≈(O ⊤·O)  ij                                                                           (23)
                   H(θ)   ij = ReE  p(Ji−E p [Ji])∗ (EL,j +E L (Jj−E p [Jj]))               (24)
                              ≈(O ⊤·A)  ij                                                                           (25)

We  introduced  the  log  derivativeJ i(x)  =∂   θi logψ  θ(x),  andE     L,i(x)  =∂   θiEL(x)
denotes the derivative of the local energy. The matrices in the final expressions read

      en =    2√M ReImn           EL(x  (m)    )−E                                                          e∈R      2M
                                                                                                                      (26)

   Onj =    1√M ReImn             Jj(x  (m)    )−E  p [Jj]                                            O∈R       2M×P
                                                                                                                      (27)


                                                            13
   Anj =    1√M ReImn         EL,θ(x  (m)    ) +E L(x  (m)    )(J j(x  (m)    )−E  p [Jj])  A∈R       2M×P
                                                                                                          (28)

wherem= [(n−1) modM] + 1, i.e., we countm= 1,...,M,1,...,M, and ReIm                    n
indicates that the real part must be considered forn= 1,...,Mand the imaginary
part forn=M+ 1,...,2M. While computing the JacobianJand the local energies
EL  are standard practices in SR as well, the local energy derivativeE L,i  is new in
PII. However, for spin systems and neural network wave functions, the gradients in
EL,i of the wave function can be computed with a computational cost scaling similarly
toE  L. Indeed, backpropagation for many neural network architectures has the same
scaling as a forward pass, typically roughly adding a constant factor 3 in FLOPs [44],
independent of the system size.
    Despite the symmetry ofH(θ) in Eq. (19), the Monte Carlo estimator in Eq. (25)
is only asymptotically Hermitian. In practice, we use a Tikhonov regularization for
the preconditioner

                                     Q(θ) =H(θ)−τS(θ) +λI               P.                                     (29)

Notice thatλhas the unit of energy here, while our learning rateηis dimensionless.
Hence, the magnitudes ofλandηfor PII and SR have no clear relation. We remark
that the choice of regularization strength is in general a delicate matter [45,46].
    We  can  further  use  the  push-through  identity  for  the  inversion  of  the  empirical
preconditioner
            O⊤A−τO   ⊤O+λI    P−1   O⊤e=O  ⊤ OA⊤−τOO  ⊤ +λI      2M −1   e      (30)


In the case 2M≤Pwe now need to invert the smaller matrix

                                 OA⊤−τOO  ⊤ +λI      2M ∈R   2M×2M                                          (31)

We will refer to this approach as MinPII, in accordance with MinSR that uses the same
push-through  identity  [13].  In  the  numerical  experiments,  we  use  minPII  whenever
2M <Pand PII otherwise. This yields a computational cost ofO(min(M                         2P,P 2M))
due to the matrix-matrix multiplications involved in forming the preconditioner. We
use scipy’s general linear solve to obtain the solution to the linear problem in all cases.

3.4  Kaczmarz-inspired acceleration
Here, we discuss how to adapt the ideas of the SPRING algorithm [30] (or similarly
MARCH [34]) to the setting of PII. SPRING improves the sample efficiency of SR and
thereby frequently improves its empirical performance. We observe a similar behavior
for PII as illustrated in Supplemental MaterialG, motivating the theoretical derivation
in this section.
    The derivation of SPRING requires a least-squares formulation of the update direc-
tion. Because of the non-symmetric Monte Carlo estimator of theH-matrix in Eq. (25),


                                                      14
a  least-squares  formulation  of  PII  is  not  clear  a  priori.  For  flexibility,  we  specialize
the  viewpoint  of  Ref.  [35]  to  the  VMC  setting.  The  linear  system  in  the  Galerkin
projection in Eq. (14) can equivalently be solved as a minimization problem


                                                                      PX
                  ξ∗ = argmin                                    2∥       |∂ j ˆψk⟩ξ j−|d k⟩∥2b.              (32)
                           ξ∈R  P L(ξ),   whereL(ξ) =                        1j=1

An important consequence of our framework is that we defined the norm to be with
respect  to  a  general  inner  productb.  By  expanding  the  objective  above  and  using
the definitions of the preconditionerQ(θ       k) and the parameter gradient∇ θE(ψ  k), the
minimization objective reduces to the quadratic form:

                            L(ξ) =       12ξ⊤Q(θ  k)ξ−    12ξ⊤∇θE(ψ  k) + const.                         (33)

From this perspective, adding anL     2 penaltyλ∥ξ∥          22 toLto keep the norm ofξsmall
recovers the standard Tikhonov-regularized linear system in Eq.29. This equivalence
is straightforward to verify for SR, wherebsimply reduces to the standardL                                2 norm
andQreduces to the overlap matrixS[42].
    To  achieve  the  sample  efficiency  of  SPRING  through  Kaczmarz  within  PII,  we
replace the origin-centered penalty above with a term anchored to the update direction
from the previous VMC step,ξ    k−1

  ξ∗ = argmin         L(ξ) +   λ2∥ξ−µξ   k−1 ∥22                                                               (34)
           ξ∈R  P
                     1
      = argmin        2ξTQ(θ  k)ξ−    12ξT∇θE(ψ  k) +µξ  TQ(θ  k)ξ k−1     + λ2ξTξ               +µξ k−1       (35)
           ξ∈R  P

Converting the above back into a linear problem yields PII-SPRING

                    (Q(θ  k) +λI   P ) (ξ−µξ   k−1    ) = 12∇θE(ψ  k)−µQ(θ      k)ξ k−1                      (36)

In terms of Monte Carlo estimators, we obtain the solution

       ξ∗ =µξ k−1     + OT A−τO    T O+λI          2M −1   OT 12e−µ     (A−τO        )ξk−1          (37)

which  also  has  a  straightforward  MinPII-SPRING  form  using  the  push-through
identity as in Eq. (30).

3.5  Convergence results
We  present  the  precise  convergence  results  for  PII  and  SR  in  the  non-parametric
setting, where these algorithms correspond to inverse iteration and Riemannian gradi-
ent descent with retraction by normalization, respectively. Further details on inverse


                                                        15
iteration and eigenvalue methods can be found in Ref. [47], and on Riemannian opti-
mization  in  Refs.  [41, 48].  In  the  following,  we  consider  a  Hermitian  Hamiltonian
ˆH∈C       2n×2 n  acting on the Hilbert spaceH=C                  2n. We denote its distinct eigenval-
ues,  which  may  correspond  to  degenerate  eigenspaces,  byE   0 < E1 <···< E     max.
LettingV               0  represent the ground state eigenspace associated withE         0, we define the
system’s  spectral  gap  as  ∆  =E    1−E    0 >0,  and  the  system’s  spectral  spread  as
Γ =E    max−E    0. ByP      0 andP  ⊥0   we denote the orthogonal projection ontoV    0 and its
orthogonal complement, respectively.


Theorem 1(Convergence  of  Inverse  Iteration)Let  the  sequence(ψ          k)k∈N      be  generated  by
inverse iteration with shiftτ <          12(E  0 +E   1), i.e.,

                                          ψk+1   =   ( ˆH−τI)  −1 ψk∥(   ˆH−τI)  −1 ψk∥.

Assume that the initial iterateψ      0∈Shas nonzero overlap withV             0, meaningP          0ψ0 is non-zero
and setψ ∗ :=P   0ψ0/∥P    0ψ0∥∈V   0. Then, it holds √         !1− E1−E   0
                                                                                      k
                             ∥ψ k±ψ ∗∥≤            2∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥∥P  0ψ0∥      E1−τ         .                             (38)

The sign in front ofψ ∗  in the equation above is given bysign(E             0−τ).


Theorem 2(Convergence of Riemannian Gradient Descent)Let  the  sequence(ψ    k)k∈N      be
generated by Riemannian gradient descent with retraction by normalization, i.e.,

               ψk+1   = ψk−ηgrad     SE(ψ  k)∥ψ k−ηgrad     SE(ψ  k)∥ ,   grad SE(ψ  k) = 2[ ˆHψk−E(ψ   k)ψ k].

Assume that the initial iterateψ      0∈Shas nonzero overlap withV             0, meaningP          0ψ0 is non-zero
and setψ ∗ :=P   0ψ0/∥P    0ψ0∥∈V   0. Then, choosing the stepsizeη= 1/(2(E                          max−E   0))it holds √!1−   1
                                                                           E1−E   0      k
                           ∥ψ k−ψ ∗∥≤            2∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥∥P  0ψ0∥    2  Emax−E   0

Moreover, the algorithm converges for every step-sizeη<1/(E                         max−E   0).


    The  proofs  for  both  results  are  provided  in  Appendix3.5.  As  discussed  in  the
Section3, these theorems establish the global linear convergence of both algorithms.
They illustrate how the convergence rate of Riemannian gradient descent deteriorates
as the spectral gap closes and the spread widens, while inverse iteration can achieve a
gap-independent and arbitrarily fast rate asτ→E           0. Notably, the explicit constants
in these bounds are identical for Riemannian gradient descent and inverse iteration.
While the general convergence properties of these underlying methods are well-known
in principle, we are not aware of existing literature that provides a complete, global
non-asymptotic analysis with fully explicit constants that also accommodates degen-
erate  ground  states.  For  this  reason,  we  state  the  rigorous  results  in  full  here  and
provide the complete proofs in Appendix3.5. We emphasize that our core theoreti-
cal contribution is the realization that the analysis above directly describes SR and
PII, as these are the Galerkin-projected variants of Riemannian gradient descent and
inverse iteration.

                                                         16
4  Conclusions and Outlook

We  introduced  Projected  Inverse  Iteration  (PII)  to  optimize  neural  network  wave-
functions  by  framing  the  ground-state  search  as  an  eigenvalue  problem  rather  than
an energy minimization task. Our theoretical framework identifies Stochastic Recon-
figuration (SR) as a Galerkin-projected Riemannian gradient descent, which explains
its sensitivity to closing spectral gaps. In contrast, PII projects classical inverse iter-
ation onto the tangent space of the variational manifold. Numerical experiments on
highly frustrated two-dimensional spin systems confirm that PII is robust to closing
spectral gaps, yielding significantly faster convergence than SR while maintaining the
same favorable computational scaling.
    Future research will focus on extending PII to target excited states. Additionally,
integrating PII with variance reduction techniques and advanced sampling methods
will be necessary to adapt the algorithm for complex fermionic systems in quantum
chemistry and condensed matter physics.
    Beyond quantum mechanics, PII demonstrates the utility of an infinite-dimensional
perspective on optimization in scientific machine learning, as suggested in [35]. Because
PII can be interpreted as a natural gradient method tailored specifically for eigenvalue
problems, it maps directly to general non-linearly parameterized eigenvalue problems.
We anticipate this makes PII a robust, scalable tool for a wider class of challenges in
computational science.
Acknowledgements.The simulations in this work were based on Netket [49,50]
and Jax [44].

Declarations

MZ acknowledges support from an ETH Postdoctoral Fellowship for the project “Reli-
able, Efficient, and Scalable Methods for Scientific Machine Learning”. This work was
supported by a grant from the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS) under
project ID lp20 on Alps.

Code availability

An implementation of the algorithms presented in this work are available on the github:
https://github.com/jwnys/projected            inverse   iteration.

Appendix A    Variational model: ViT recap

The variational state used in this work is based on the previously introduced ViT archi-
tecture for lattice spin systems [27]. A spin configuration on anL×Lsquare lattice
is divided intob×bblocks, yieldingN=L                                   2/b2  patches. Each patch is mapped lin-
early to ad-dimensional embedding, defining the input sequenceX                       (0) = [x 1,...,x N],
withx    i∈R d.  The  sequence  is  then  processed  byn ℓ  stacked  encoder  blocks.  Each
block contains a multi-head factored attention (MHFA) layer and a point-wise feed-
forward network of hidden size 2dwith ReLU activation, with residual connections and


                                                   17
pre-layer normalization throughout. Given an input sequenceX                  (ℓ)   , the MHFA layer
produces an intermediate sequenceA                  (ℓ)    = [A 1,...,A N], whereA     i∈R d, according to


                                             dX          NX           dX
                                 Ai,p =         Wp,q        αµ(q)ij      Vq,rx(ℓ)j,r.                              (A1)
                                           q=1         j=1          r=1

    Here,x           (ℓ)j,r denotes ther-th component of thed-dimensional representation of patch
jat layerℓ;µ(q) =⌈qh/d⌉maps the feature indexqto its corresponding attention
head;V∈R       d×d     andW∈R      d×d     are learnable weight matrices; andα   µ∈R N×N      is the
attention  matrix.  Unlike  standard  dot-product  attention,  where  the  coefficients  are
generated from query–key overlaps through a softmax, MHFA[27] treats the attention
weights  themselves  as  variational  parameters.  On  the  periodic  patch  lattice,  these
weights are taken in relative formα    µij  =α µi−j  ,with the index difference understood
modulo the patch lattice. This parameterization is compatible with lattice translations
and reduces the number of attention parameters fromO(N               2) toO(N). The encoder
block then updates the sequenceX                  (ℓ)    according to
                                ˜X(ℓ)    =X    (ℓ)   + MHFA
                                                               LayerNorm(X                 (ℓ)   ),                       (A2)

                            X(ℓ+1)    =  ˜X(ℓ)   + MLP      LayerNorm( ˜X(ℓ)   )       .                          (A3)

Aftern    ℓ  blocks, the final sequenceX                  (n ℓ) = (y  1,...,y N) is summed over patchesN
to  give  a  singled-dimensional  representation,z=         PNi=1 yi ∈R d.  The  variational
wavefunction is then parameterized as log Ψθ(σ) =f   θ(σ) +ig   θ(σ),, with


                                                   dX
                                     fθ(σ) =           ϕ  b(f)α   +w    (f)α ·z,                                   (A4)
                                                 α=1
                                                   dX
                                      gθ(σ) =          ϕ  b(g)α   +w    (g)α ·z,                                   (A5)
                                                 α=1

whereϕ(x) = log coshx. All parametersbandware real valued. For stoquastic Hamil-
tonians, a positive real-valued ansatz is used, obtained by omitting the imaginary part
gθ(σ). For frustrated systems the complex-valued form is used.

Appendix B    Practical implementation details

In this section, we present the pseudocode for the parameter-space implementation of
PII used in the Results section (Algorithm1), based on the Monte Carlo estimators
introduced  in  Eqs.  (21)–(25).  At  iterationk,  samples  are  drawn  from  the  current
variational state to estimate the projected quantities, after which the regularized linear
system in Eq. (29) is solved to obtain the update direction in parameter space.




                                                         18
                                      Algorithm 1Practical implementation of PII
                                      Require:regularizationλ, learning-rate schedule{η                         k}K−1k=0   , number of iterationsK, sample
                                            countM, initial parametersθ                           0, energy shiftτ
                                        1:fork= 0,...,K−1do
                                        2:     DrawMMCMC samples
                                        3:     Estimatee        k,Ok, andA   k         (see Eqs. (26)–(28))
                                        4:     Form∇    θE(ψ  k)←O  ⊤k ek
                                        5:     FormQ    k←O ⊤k Ak−τO ⊤k Ok +λI       (see Eqs. (23)–(25) & Eq. (29) for PII, or
                                            Eq. (31) for MinPII)
                                        6:     Solve the linear systemξ      k =Q −1k   [ 12∇θE(ψ  k)]
                                        7:     Update parameters:θ          k+1 ←θ  k−η kξk         (see Eq. (5))
                                        8:end for
                                        9:returnθ       K

                                      Appendix C    Numerical details: hyperparameters for
                                                                            the experiments

                                      TableC1shows the architecture and optimization hyperparameters used in the numer-
                                      ical experiments reported in the Results section. For the ViT ansatz, the architectural
                                      parameters are the number of transformer layersn  ℓ, the number of attention headsh,
                                      the embedding dimensiond, and the patch sizeb. For the RBM ansatz, we report the
                                      hidden-unit densityα. The optimization parameters are the number of Monte Carlo
                                      samplesM, the learning rateη, the regularization parameterλ, and, where applicable,
                                      the energy shiftτ.


                                      Table C1Architecture and optimization hyperparameters used in the numerical experiments.

























                                                                                                           19
















Figure     System      Size      Method        Ansatz             Architecture                        Optimization
                                                                    nℓ h d  b α    M       η     λ   τ
Fig.2    TFIM        4×4     PII             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768              1.0        10   −2   E0
Fig.2    TFIM        4×4     SR             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768             0.01       10   −4      —
Fig.2    TFIM        4×4     Adam          real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768             0.01       10   −4      —
Fig.3a    TFIM        4×4     PII             RBM           —  —  —  —   4   512, 4096, 16384        1.0        10   −1   E0
Fig.3b    TFIM        4×4     PII             RBM           —  —  —  —   4   512, 4096, 16384        1.0        10   −1    1.2E    0
Fig.3c    TFIM        4×4     PII             RBM           —  —  —  —   4        full sum            1.0        10   −1  αE0
Fig.4a    TFIM        10×10  PII             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768              1.0        10   −3    1.1E    0
Fig.4a    TFIM        10×10  SR             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768            0.002      10   −4      —
Fig.4b    Heisenberg  10×10  PII             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768              1.0        10   −2    1.4E    0
Fig.4b    Heisenberg  10×10  SR             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768            0.002      10   −4      —
Fig.4c J        1–J  2        10×10  MinPII        complex ViT   4   10  60   2   —        16384              1.0        10 −1   E0
Fig.4c J        1–J  2        10×10  MinSR         complex ViT   4   10  60   2   —        16384            0.004      10 −4      —
Fig.D1a  TFIM        10×10  SR             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768        0.001→0.01  10       −3      —
Fig.D1b  TFIM        10×10  SR             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —        32768        0.001→0.01  10       −4      —
Fig.E2a   TFIM        4×4     PII             RBM           —  —  —  —   4        full sum            1.0        10   −1    1.4E    0
Fig.E2b  TFIM        4×4     PII             RBM           —  —  —  —   4         4096              1.0        10   −1    1.4E    0
Fig.G3TFIM        10×10  PII             real ViT        4   2   20   2   —     4096, 32768          1.0        10    −3    1.1E    0
Fig.G3TFIM        10×10  PII-SPRING  real ViT        4   2   20   2   —     4096, 32768          1.0        10    −3    1.1E    0
Fig. D1  SR is sensitive to learning-rate tuning on the10×10TFIM.Energy per site versus
iteration for TFIM ath/J= 2, comparing SR across several learning rates with PII.A,Results for
λ= 10  −3   .B,Results forλ= 10         −4   . As the SR learning rate is increased, the optimization becomes
progressively less stable, with transient spikes appearing in the estimated ground state energy. By
contrast, PII converges to the ground state more rapidly than all SR settings shown here. The yellow
star  marks  the  SR  hyperparameter  setting  used  in  the  main  text,  corresponding  to  the  best  SR
performance considered here.
Appendix D    Details about finetuning learning rate
                               of SR: demonstration of failure at
                               higher LR

In  this  section,  we  show  that  SR  was  tuned  as  carefully  as  possible  to  obtain  its
strongest  performance.  Even  under  such  tuning,  SR  remains  sensitive  to  the  joint
choice of learning rate and diagonal shift. FigureD1a,b shows the optimization tra-
jectories  obtained  with  two  diagonal  shifts,λ=  10    −3    andλ=  10   −4  ,  respectively.
The diagonal shift is introduced to improve numerical stability; however, if it is set
too large, the SR convergence slows down. We therefore useλ= 10   −4    as the best-
performing SR setting. Keeping the diagonal shift fixed atλ= 10  −4  , we then increase
the learning rate fromη= 0.001 toη= 0.01. As shown in Fig.D1, larger learning rates
progressively destabilize SR, leading to pronounced transient spikes and oscillations
in the energy trajectory.

Appendix E    Properties of theHmatrix

To clarify the meaning of the matricesH(θ) andS(θ) defined in Eqs. (19) and (18),
we interpret them as the effective Hamiltonian and the induced Hilbert-space metric
on the variational tangent spaceV    θ = span{∂     θi ˆψθ}Pi=1 ⊂T    ˆψθS.Consider an arbitrary
tangent vector|φ⟩=     PPi=1 vi∂θi| ˆψθ⟩∈Vθ,with coefficient vectorv∈R       P . By con-
struction,H(θ) andS(θ) reproduce the energy and norm of|φ⟩within this local linear
space:
                                          v⊤H(θ)v
                                           v⊤S(θ)v         =⟨φ|     ˆH|φ⟩⟨φ|φ⟩    .                                          (E6)


                                                       20
The generalized eigenvalue problem

                                               H(θ)v=λS(θ)v                                              (E7)

therefore coincides with the Schr¨odinger problem projected ontoV  θ. Equivalently, the
generalized eigenvalues of (H(θ),S(θ)) are the Ritz values of                ˆHin the tangent space.
Ordering them asλ    min(θ) =λ        1(θ)≤λ         2(θ)≤···, the smallest one satisfies

                                       λmin(θ) =   min          ⟨φ|     ˆH|φ⟩
                                                      0̸=φ∈V   θ  ⟨φ|φ⟩    ,                                      (E8)

and thus gives the lowest Ritz value in the tangent space around  ˆψθ. At convergence,ˆψθ∗  =ψ    0,  the  tangent  space  is  orthogonal  to  the  ground  state  and  therefore  lies

entirely in the excited-state sector. Accordingly, any nonzeroφ∈V        θ∗ can be expanded
as|φ⟩=   Pn≥1  cn|E n⟩, and Eq. (E8) reduces to
                                                          P
                              λmin(θ∗) =    min             Pn≥1 |c n|2En
                                              0̸=φ∈V   θ∗      n≥1 |c n|2 ≥E    1,                           (E9)

withE         1  the  first  excited-state  energy.  The  bound  is  saturated  if  the  tangent  space
contains a nonzero vector in the first-excited eigenspace.
    FigureE2shows this behavior directly. In the full-sum calculation, the variational
energy decreases towardE       0, whereasλ                min  rapidly approachesE      1  and then remains
near it. Once the ground-state direction is excluded from the tangent space, the low-
est mode of the projected problem is controlled by the lowest excited-state direction
contained in that space.

Appendix F    Stochastic Reconfiguration as Power
                              Iteration

Here,  we  recall  the  connection  between  power  iteration  and  Riemannian  gradient
descent  with  retraction  by  normalization.  The  functional  update  for  Riemannian
gradient descent can be re-written as


                                 ψk+1   = ψk−2η(       ˆHψk−E(ψ    k)ψ k)∥ψ k−2η(       ˆHψk−E(ψ    k)ψ k)∥


                                        =   (τ kI−   ˆH)ψ  k∥(τ  kI−   ˆH)ψ  k∥,


whereτ     k  =E(ψ    k) +   12η  .  The  latter  is  one  step  of  power  iteration  for  the  operator
τk−  ˆH,  which  for  a  suitable  choice  ofηshifts  the  Hamiltonian  such  that  we  can
compute the ground state with a power iteration.




                                                        21
Fig. E2  Projected tangent-space spectrum during optimization on the4×4Heisenberg
model.Variational energyEand smallest generalized eigenvalueλ                              min of the matrix pair (H(θ),S(θ))
during optimization with a real-valued RBM ansatz of hidden-unit densityα= 4. All runs use the
same  optimization  hyperparameters,τ=  1.4E                                0,λ=  0.1,  andη=  1.0.a,  Full-sum  estimator.b,
Monte Carlo estimator with 4k samples.
























Fig. G3  SPRING accelerates convergence on the10×10TFIM for small sample size.
Relative  error  as  a  function  of  iteration  for  PII  and  PII-SPRING  (MinPII  and  MinPII-SPRING)
on the 10×10 TFIM ath/J= 2 in a real-valued ViT ansatz. All runs use the same optimization
hyperparameters,τ= 1.1E                                0,λ= 10   −3   , andη= 1.0. For SPRING, we usedµ= 0.8.
Appendix G    PII-SPRING and MinPII-SPRING

In  this  section,  we  study  whether  the  PII-SPRING  algorithm  improves  the  perfor-
mance of PII. Fig.G3shows that the advantage of PII-SPRING is obvious in the small
sample size regime. ForM= 32k, PII-SPRING exhibits a slightly faster convergence
rate than PII, while the two methods become comparable at later iterations. The dif-
ference is much more pronounced forM= 4k, where MinPII-SPRING reaches relative


                                                         22
errors  of  order  10−4    substantially  earlier  than  MinPII.  This  behaviour  is  expected
when the number of samples is smaller than the number of variational parameters.
The sampled linear system is then underdetermined and gives only a rough approxi-
mation to the full projected update. Updates based on the current samples alone are
then more sensitive to finite-sampling noise. SPRING partly compensates for this by
reusing information from last step. When the number of samples is much larger than
the number of variational parameters, the sampled least-squares problem is overde-
termined and typically close to uniquely determined, leaving less room for SPRING
to improve the update direction.

Appendix H    Inverse Iteration as a Riemannian
                               Newton Method

The  Riemannian  Newton  method  with  retraction  by  normalization  is  given  by  the
recursion
                           ψk+1   = ψk−Hess   SE(ψ  k)−1  [gradSE(ψ  k)]∥ψ k−Hess   SE(ψ  k)−1  [gradSE(ψ  k)]∥ .                      (H10)

Here, for tangent vectorsv,w∈T       ψSthe Riemannian Hessian and gradient are given
by

                             HessSE(ψ)(v,w) = 2    ⟨(  ˆH−E(ψ)I)v,w⟩       
                                    gradSE(ψ) = 2   ˆHψ−E(ψ)ψ     

IfE(ψ)/∈σ(                  ˆH), the solutiond∈T          ψSto HessE(ψ)(d,·) =⟨gradE(ψ),·⟩is given by


                                    d=ψ−            ( ˆH−E(ψ)I)     −1 ψ⟨ψ,(   ˆH−E(ψ)I)     −1 ψ⟩ .


This can be seen by checking thatdis a tangent vector, i.e., it satisfies⟨d,ψ⟩= 1−1 = 0
and thatdin fact solves the correct equation⟨(                        ˆH−E(ψ)I)d,w⟩=⟨(                          ˆH−E(ψ)I)ψ,w⟩.
By using the explicit formula fordin the Riemannian Newton method above, we find


                           ψk+1   = ψk−d k∥ψ k−d k∥ =   ( ˆH−E(ψ     k)I) −1 ψk∥(   ˆH−E(ψ     k)I) −1 ψk∥


This is iterative scheme is known as Rayleigh Quotient Iteration [36]. If we modify the
Riemannian Hessian to be  ˆH−τI(acting only on tangent vectors) the same derivation
as above shows that we obtain shifted Inverse Iteration with shiftτ

                                        ψk+1   =   ( ˆH−τI)   −1 ψk∥(   ˆH−τI)   −1 ψk∥                                       (H11)


which is well-suited when a priori information onE     0 is at hand, in which case we set
τ≈E      0.


                                                       23
Fig. I4  Spectral gap and spread of the4×4TFIM versush/Jobtained with ED.
Appendix I    Spectral gap analysis

To  understand  the  different  convergence  behavior  of  SR  and  PII,  we  compute  the
spectrum  of  the  4×4  TFIM  as  a  function  ofh/Jusing  ED.  We  focus  on  the  first
gapE       1−E    0, the second gapE       2−E    0, and the spectral widthE            max−E    0. FigureI4
clarifies the spectral regime relevant for SR optimization. At smallh/J, the first gap
∆ =E    1−E    0 is strongly suppressed and falls below 10−3  , making the ground state and
first excited state effectively degenerate to VMC. Consequently, the optimizations are
not governed solely by the lowest excitation gap; the second excitation gapE       2−E    0
dominates the convergence. This motivates our choice ofh/J= 2 for the comparison.
Over  the  same  range,E            2−E    0  remains  much  larger  and  reaches  its  minimum  only
aroundh/J≈2.6, whereas the spectral spreadE                                          max−E    0 stays large.
Appendix J    Details of Mathematical Derivations

In this section, we provide the proofs of the convergence results for inverse iteration
and Riemannian gradient descent stated in the main text.


Theorem 1(Convergence  of  Inverse  Iteration)Let  the  sequence(ψ          k)k∈N      be  generated  by
inverse iteration with shiftτ <          12(E  0 +E   1), i.e.,

                                          ψk+1   =   ( ˆH−τI)  −1 ψk∥(   ˆH−τI)  −1 ψk∥.

Assume that the initial iterateψ      0∈Shas nonzero overlap withV             0, meaningP          0ψ0 is non-zero
and setψ ∗ :=P   0ψ0/∥P    0ψ0∥∈V   0. Then, it holds √         !1− E1−E   0
                                                                                     k
                             ∥ψ k±ψ ∗∥≤            2∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥∥P  0ψ0∥     E1−τ         .                             (38)

The sign in front ofψ ∗  in the equation above is given bysign(E             0−τ).



                                                         24
ProofDenote  the  shifted  inverse  byT  τ  =  ( ˆH−τI)  −1   .  The  assumptionτ <                        12(E  0 +E   1)
guarantees  that  the  spectrum  ofT τ  attains  its  maximum  inµ    0  =  (E  0−τ) −1   .  Using  this
notation, we writeψ    k =c kTτψ0 withc   k =∥T  kτ∥−1   . Moreover, we splitψ        0 =P   0ψ0 +P ⊥0 ψ0 =
v0 +w   0. Then it holds
                                                  ψk =c k[µk0 +T  kτw0].
We use this to compute
                  ψk−sign(µ            0)k v0 2     ckµk0v0 +c kTkτw0−sign(µ            0)k v0       2
                                          ∥v  0∥     =                                              ∥v  0∥
                                                        ck|µ 0|k∥v  0∥−1     2 +c   2k∥T kτw0∥2.
                                                     =
We estimate both terms above separately and start with the second. To this end, we note
that it holds
                          c2k =        1∥T kτψ0∥2  =                 1∥T kτv0∥2 +∥T  kτw0∥2≤          1|µ 0|2k ∥v  0∥2.

This then yields
                                             c2k∥T kτw0∥2≤|µ 1|2k ∥w  0∥2|µ 0|2k ∥v  0∥2.

To treat the second term, we need the following equalityq

                                       ∥T kτψ0∥=         |µ 0|2k ∥v  0∥+∥T   kτw0∥2.
Using this, we compute
                                               !2                                                  2
                            |µ 0|k∥v  0∥            =      |µ 0|k∥v  0∥q                           
                             ∥T kτψ0∥ −1                      |µ 0|2k ∥v  0∥+∥T   kτw0∥2−1
                                                                                           2
                                                    =   r            1                   
                                                                      ∥T τw0∥      2−1
                                                              1 +     |µ 0|k∥v  0∥
                                                                        !2
                                                    ≤       ∥T kτw0∥
                                                           |µ 0|k∥v  0∥

                                                    =|µ 1|2k ∥w  0∥2|µ 0|2k ∥v  0∥2.

For the inequality above, we used the squared version of the inequality 1−         1√1+x      2≤x. This
can easily be seen to hold true by the fact that the functionf(x) =x+                                  1√1+x      2−1 satisfies
f(0) = 0 andf   ′(x)≥0 for allx≥0 and thus it holdsf(x)≥0 for allx≥0. Using the two
estimates for the terms above, we get
                            ψk−sign(µ            0)k v0≤√            µ1 k
                                                   ∥v  0∥          2∥w  0∥∥v  0∥µ0
                                                                             E0−τ     k
                                                             =√2∥w  0∥∥v  0∥   E1−τ
                                                                             1− E1−E   0     k
                                                             =√2∥w  0∥∥v  0∥         E1−τ           .

                                                                                                                               □

                                                               25
     We now turn to the convergence proof for Riemannian gradient descent. As a first
step, we prove a descent lemma.


Lemma 3(Descent Lemma)For this lemma letE                       0≤E   1≤···≤E   max denote the eigenval-
ues of  ˆHcounted with multiplicities and denote byv        0,v1,... an orthonormal basis consisting
of  eigenvectors.  Note  that  degenerate  ground  states  are  still  fully  covered  by  this  setting.
Let  again(ψ     k)k∈N      denote  the  iterates  of  Riemannian  gradient  descent  with  retraction  by
normalization. Then it holds
                                                   X
       E(ψ  k+1  )−E(ψ    k) =−        4η∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2     (E i−E(ψ   k))2 [1−η(E    i−E(ψ   k))]|c  ki|2,        (J12)
                                                   i=0
where                          ˜ψk+1   =ψ k−ηgrad     SE(ψ  k),   andc    ki  =⟨ψ  k|vi⟩.

Hence, forη≤(E            max−E   0)−1    = Γ−1    it holds that
                                                  E(ψ  k+1  )≤E(ψ    k).                                                (J13)



ProofFirst we expandψ       k and  ˜ψk+1   in the orthonormal basis (v i)

                                      ψk =Xckivi,     ˜ψk+1   =X˜c k+1i  vi.
                                              i=0                        i=0
Note that we can writeP
                                 i=0 |˜c k+1i |2                                           X
                E(ψ  k) =        ∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2  E(ψ  k),  E(ψ   k+1  ) =       1∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2         Ei|˜c k+1i |2
                                                                                           i=0
and thus it follows
                         E(ψ  k+1  )−E(ψ    k) =       1           X(E i−E(ψ   k))|˜c   k+1i |2
                                                       ∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2  i=0

Note  that  ˜c k+1i      =  [1−2η(E     i−E(ψ   k))]c  ki ,  and  inserting  in  the  equality  above,  using  the
abbreviation ∆i =E i−E(ψ   k) it follows
                                                  X
        E(ψ  k+1  )−E(ψ    k) =       1∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2      ∆i(1−2η∆     i)2|cki|2
                                                  i=0
                                 =       1        X(∆i−4η∆        2i + 4η  2∆3i )|c ki|2
                                     ∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2   i=0
                                                  "X                                                              #
                                 =       1∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥2     ∆i|cki|2−4η  X        ∆2i|cki|2 + 4η  2X       ∆3i|cki|2    .
                                                    i=0                   i=0                      i=0
This is a (weighted) expansion in terms of the first three moments. The first moment vanishes,
as can be seen by the following computation
                      X     ∆i|cki|2 =X(E i−E(ψ   k))|c  ki|2 =E(ψ   k)−E(ψ    k) = 0.

                       i=0                i=0
Rearranging yields the assertion.                                                        □

     We  can  now  proceed  to  prove  the  convergence  result  for  Riemannian  gradient
descent.


                                                             26
Theorem 2(Convergence of Riemannian Gradient Descent)Let  the  sequence(ψ    k)k∈N      be
generated by Riemannian gradient descent with retraction by normalization, i.e.,

               ψk+1   = ψk−ηgrad     SE(ψ  k)∥ψ k−ηgrad     SE(ψ  k)∥ ,   grad SE(ψ  k) = 2[ ˆHψk−E(ψ   k)ψ k].

Assume that the initial iterateψ      0∈Shas nonzero overlap withV             0, meaningP          0ψ0 is non-zero
and setψ ∗ :=P   0ψ0/∥P    0ψ0∥∈V   0. Then, choosing the stepsizeη= 1/(2(E                          max−E   0))it holds
                                                √                 !1−   1                  k
                             ∥ψ k−ψ ∗∥≤             2∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥                  E1−E   0
                                                       ∥P  0ψ0∥             2 Emax−E   0

Moreover, the algorithm converges for every step-sizeη<1/(E                         max−E   0).



ProofThe proof proceeds in three steps. We begin by showing the invariance of the initial
ground state component first, analyze the optimization dynamics along the eigenvectors in a
second step, and finally derive theL      2 error decay rate.

First Step: Invariance of the Ground State Direction
An un-normalized gradient descent step is of the form
                                       ˜ψk+1   =ψ k−2η[       ˆHψk−E(ψ   k)ψ k].

We applyP          0 to both sides of this equation and use thatP        0 commutes with the Hamiltonian
                                P0 ˜ψk+1   =P   0ψk−2η(       ˆHP0ψk−E(ψ   k)P  0ψk)
                                           = [1−2η(E             0−E(ψ   k))]P     0ψk.
Note that [1−2η(E             0−E(ψ   k))] is a positive scalar which we abbreviate withs  k. We then
compute
                              P0ψk+1
                             ∥P  0ψk+1 ∥ = P0 ˜ψk+1∥P  0 ˜ψk+1 ∥ = skP0ψksk∥P  0ψk∥ = P0ψk∥P  0ψk∥.
Applying this equalityk-times yields the invariance
                                               P0ψk
                                             ∥P  0ψk∥ = P0ψ0∥P  0ψ0∥ =:ψ∗.                                           (J14)

Second Step: Optimization Dynamics Along Eigenvectors
We writeP   ⊥0 ψk =Pmaxi=d     0ckivi, whered           0 = dim(V         0). As a first step we will show
                                   |ck+1i |         1−2η(E     i−E(ψ   k))       |cki|

                                ∥P  0ψk+1 ∥ =       1−2η(E           0−E(ψ   k))  ∥P  0ψk∥.                            (J15)
To show this, we set              ˜ψk+1   =ψ k−2η(       ˆHψk−E(ψ   k)ψ k)

and write                                                      maxX
                                               P⊥0  ˜ψk+1   =       ˜c k+1i  vi.
                                                               i=1
Note  that  it  holds  ˜c k+1i  /∥   ˜ψk+1 ∥ =c  k+1i     .  ApplyingP     ⊥0    to   ˜ψk+1    and  using  that  the
Hamiltonian commutes with the projection yields
                             P⊥0  ˜ψk+1   =P ⊥0 ψk−2η(       ˆHP⊥0 ψk−E(ψ   k)P ⊥0 ψk).


                                                             27
Now we take the inner product with the eigenvectorv    i, which gives
                                         ˜c k+1i      =c ki−2η(E    icki−E(ψ   k)c ki )
                                                 = [1−2η(E     i−E(ψ   k))]c  ki.
We also applyP          0 to  ˜ψk+1   and obtain
                                      P0 ˜ψk+1   = [1−2η(E           0−E(ψ   k))]P     0ψk.
We obtain                                                                      1−2η(E     i−E(ψ   k))
          |ck+1i |                                                                                               |cki|
       ∥P  0ψk+1 ∥ = |˜c k+1i |·∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥∥P  0 ˜ψk+1 ∥·∥ ˜ψk+1 ∥ = |˜c k+1i |∥P  0 ˜ψk+1 ∥ =1−2η(E           0−E(ψ   k))∥P  0ψk∥.
Inserting the step-sizeη= 1/(2(E                            max−E   0)) we get
                           1−2η(E     i−E(ψ   k))
                            1−2η(E           0−E(ψ   k)  = 1−       Ei−E   0Emax−E   0 +E(ψ   k)−E     0

                                                        ≤1−        E1−E   0Emax−E   0 +E(ψ        0)−E     0

                                                        ≤1−      1    E1−E   0
                                                                  2 Emax−E   0  =:ρ
where we usedE   i≥E   1 andE(ψ            0)≤E(ψ    k). The latter holds wheneverη<1/(E             max−E   0).
Now we use (J15)k-times
                                                  |cki|2
                                               ∥P  0ψk∥2≤ρ   2k  |c 0i|2∥P  0ψ0∥2
and then sum overi= 1,...,max to obtain
                                              ∥P ⊥0 ψk∥2
                                              ∥P  0ψk∥2 ≤ρ   2k ∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥2∥P  0ψ0∥2 .

Convergence in Norm
It remains to show that the above implies convergence in norm with the rateρ. We begin by
writing
                                              ψk =P   0ψk +P ⊥0 ψk
                                                   =∥P     0ψk∥ψ ∗ +P ⊥0 ψk.
Then, using the above, we compute
                           ∥ψ k−ψ ∗∥=∥(∥P           0ψk∥−1)ψ  ∗ +P ⊥0 ψk∥2
                                           = (1−∥P      0ψk∥)  2 +∥P  ⊥0 ψk∥2
                                           = 1−2∥P          0ψk∥+∥P        0ψk∥2 + 1−∥P    0ψk∥2
                                           = 2(1−∥P        0ψk∥)
                                           ≤2(1−∥P           0ψk∥2)
                                           = 2∥P ⊥0 ψk∥,
where we used the inequality 1−x≤1−x                 2 which is valid forx∈[0,1]. Finally, we can put
it all together by using the final estimate of the second step to obtain

                         ∥ψ k−ψ ∗∥2≤2∥P        0ψk∥2∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥2∥P  0ψ0∥2 ρ2k ≤2 ∥P ⊥0 ψ0∥2∥P  0ψ0∥2 ρ2k .

                                                                                                                               □

                                                               28
Fig. K5Illustration of varying spectral gaps for SR. A smaller spectral gap leads to slower conver-
gence and oscillatory behavior for SR.
Appendix K    Graphical Visualizations

We provide graphical visualizations of the convergence results for inverse iteration and
stochastic reconfiguration. Similar to Figure1, we use the Hamiltonian

                                      ˆH= diag(a,10,0) :R                 3→R     3,

where herea∈(0,10) is a free parameter and coincides with the spectral gap ∆ of
the Hamiltonian  ˆH. Figure1reports the results fora= 1. The spectral spread Γ = 10
is fixed for all the considered experiments. In the following, we illustrate the effect of
suboptimal spectral shifts for PII, the sensitivity of SR to step-size choices, and the
effect of closing spectral gaps for SR.

Effect of closing Spectral Gaps
In FigureK5, we illustrate the sensitivity of SR to closing spectral gaps. To this end,
we vary the parametera. We consider the valuesa= 5,1,0.5 anda= 0.25. In this
experiment,  we  choose  the  learning  rateη  ∗  to  be  the  (asymptotically)  optimal  one
among the constant learning rate schedules. It is given by

                                         η∗ =              1Emax +E    1−2E      0

and solves                                       h                               i
                                η∗ = argmin        maxi |1−2η(E      i−E    0)|
                                          η>0
The quantity|1−2η(E       i−E    0)|is obtained from Eq. (J15), and insertingE                             0 in place
ofE(ψ    k).  Note  that  in  many  scenarios,  this  step-size  is  not  available  as  it  requires



                                                        29
Fig. K6Visualization of PII for different shift valuesτfor the Hamiltonian                 ˆH= diag(1,10,0) and
a linear normalized state vector on the sphereS. Figure A visualizes the optimization dynamics on
the sphere, and Figure B shows the corresponding energy error.

exact knowledge ofE    0,E 1  andE       max. Usingη   ∗  here however, illustrates the drasti-
cally degrading convergence rates of SR a forteriori; even if the optimal step-size was
known  or  found  through  an  expensive  hyperparameter  tuning,  SR  can  only  resolve
small-gaped  systems  through  exceedingly  expensive  computations.  This  is  in  direct
accordance with Theorem2, that states that the error reduction per iteration measured
inL    2 norm is given by
                                          1−   1 E1−E    0     = 20−a
                                 ρSR =           2 Emax−E    0            20  .


Although the above result holds for the slightly different step-sizeη= 1/(2(E                              max−
E0)), it describes the qualitative behavior observed in FigureK5well. We used the
step-sizeη     ∗  to  show  that  even  with  an  optimal  choice,  SR  can  not  circumvent  a
slow-down of convergence in the presence of closing spectral gaps.

Suboptimal Spectral Shifts in Inverse Iteration
We illustrate the effect of gradually varying the shiftτ, away from the optimal value
τ= 0. In FigureK6, we show the optimization trajectories and the energy errors for
τ= 0.2,0.1 andτ= 10      −8  . We clearly see linear convergence in all three cases, with
a deteriorating convergence speed asτis further away from the optimal valueτ= 0.
This is in agreement with Theorem1, that states that the error reduction per iteration
measured inL    2 norm is given by (E  0 = 0)
                                              1− E1−E    0   =  τ
                                    ρPII =           E1−τ             1−τ  .





                                                        30
Fig.  K7Illustration  of  varying  the  step  sizes  for  SR.  Step-sizes  exceeding  the  critical  step-size
η= Γ −1    = 0.1 prevent the algorithm from convergence.

Section2.4shows that these findings also translate to nonlinearly parametrized wave-
functions, whereundershootingthe optimalτalso led to an improved robustness of
PII in its Monte Carlo variant.

Stability of SR with respect to Step Sizes
Finally, we illustrate the role of the critical step-size valueη= 1/(E                 max−E    0) = 1/Γ.
Theorem2states that SR converges only ifη <1/Γ. To visualize this threshold, we
plot the optimization trajectories and corresponding energy errors for the HamiltonianˆH= diag(1,10,0) in Figure
                    K7. There, we setη= 0.05,0.1,0.01 andη= 0.11. We
clearly see that the two choices exceeding the threshold of 0.1 do not converge, and
even lead to a non-monotone behavior of the iterates{E(ψ         k)}in the later stages of
the optimization. Such a behavior is expected also in the case of more complicated
quantum  systems  and  quantum  states  parametrized  as  neural  networks,  and  shows
that both a large spectral spread Γ, and a small spectral gap ∆ lead to a slowdown of
SR.

References

 [1]Qian, N.  On the momentum term in gradient descent learning algorithms.Neu-
      ral Networks12, 145–151 (1999).  URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
      article/pii/S0893608098001166.

 [2]Kingma,  D.  P.  &  Ba,  J.   Bengio,  Y.  &  LeCun,  Y.  (eds)Adam:  A  method  for
      stochastic optimization.  (eds Bengio, Y. & LeCun, Y.)International Conference
      on  Learning  Representations  (ICLR)(2015).  URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
      6980.



                                                      31
 [3]Martens,  J.  &  Grosse,  R.   Bach,  F.  &  Blei,  D.  (eds)Optimizing  neural  net-
     works with  kronecker-factored  approximate curvature.  (eds Bach, F. & Blei, D.)
     Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 37
     ofProceedings  of  Machine  Learning  Research, 2408–2417 (PMLR, Lille, France,
     2015).  URLhttps://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/martens15.html.

 [4]Gupta,  V.,  Koren,  T.  &  Singer,  Y.    Dy,  J.  &  Krause,  A.  (eds)Shampoo:
     Preconditioned  stochastic  tensor  optimization.   (eds  Dy,  J.  &  Krause,  A.)Pro-
     ceedings  of  the  35th  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning, Vol. 80 of
     Proceedings  of  Machine  Learning  Research,  1842–1850  (PMLR,  2018).    URL
     https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/gupta18a.html.

 [5]Vyas, N.et al.Yue, Y., Garg, A., Peng, N., Sha, F. & Yu, R. (eds)Soap: Improving
     and stabilizing shampoo using adam for language modeling.  (eds Yue, Y., Garg,
     A., Peng, N., Sha, F. & Yu, R.)International Conference on Learning Represen-
     tations, Vol. 2025, 93423–93444 (2025).  URLhttps://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper
     files/paper/2025/file/e988664070e9591f93fdcf605f7dc623-Paper-Conference.pdf.

 [6]Carleo, G. & Troyer, M. Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial
     neural networks.Science355, 602–606 (2017).  URLhttps://www.science.org/
     doi/abs/10.1126/science.aag2302.

 [7]Wu, D.et al.Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems.Science
     386,  296–301  (2024).   URLhttps://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
     adg9774.

 [8]Astrakhantsev, N.et al.Broken-symmetry ground states of the heisenberg model
     on the pyrochlore lattice.Phys.  Rev.  X11, 041021 (2021).  URLhttps://link.
     aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.041021.

 [9]Hibat-Allah, M., Ganahl, M., Hayward, L. E., Melko, R. G. & Carrasquilla, J.
     Recurrent neural network wave functions.Phys. Rev. Res.2, 023358 (2020). URL
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023358.

[10]Moss,  M.  S.,  Wiersema,  R.,  Hibat-Allah,  M.,  Carrasquilla,  J.  &  Melko,  R.  G.
     Leveraging recurrence in neural network wavefunctions for large-scale simulations
     of heisenberg antiferromagnets on the square lattice.Phys. Rev. B112, 134450
     (2025).  URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/6ccd-wzhz.

[11]Pescia,  G.,  Nys,  J.,  Kim,  J.,  Lovato,  A.  &  Carleo,  G.   Message-passing  neural
     quantum  states  for  the  homogeneous  electron  gas.Phys.  Rev.  B110,  035108
     (2024).  URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.110.035108.

[12]Viteritti, L. L., Rende, R. & Becca, F.  Transformer variational wave functions
     for frustrated quantum spin systems.Phys. Rev. Lett.130, 236401 (2023).  URL
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.130.236401.



                                                    32
[13]Chen, A. & Heyl, M.  Empowering deep neural quantum states through efficient
     optimization.Nature  Physics20,  1476–1481  (2024).   URLhttps://doi.org/10.
     1038/s41567-024-02566-1.

[14]Denis,  Z.  &  Carleo,  G.     Accurate  neural  quantum  states  for  interacting
     lattice  bosons.Quantum9,  1772  (2025).     URLhttps://doi.org/10.22331/
     q-2025-06-17-1772.

[15]Linteau,  D.,  Pescia,  G.,  Nys,  J.,  Carleo,  G.  &  Holzmann,  M.   Phase  diagram
     and crystal melting of helium-4 in two dimensions.Phys. Rev. Lett.134, 246001
     (2025).  URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/v1g7-m9k4.

[16]Pfau,  D.,  Spencer,  J.  S.,  Matthews,  A.  G.  D.  G.  &  Foulkes,  W.  M.  C.   Ab
     initio solution of the many-electron schr¨odinger equation with deep neural net-
     works.Phys. Rev. Res.2, 033429 (2020). URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevResearch.2.033429.

[17]Hermann, J., Sch¨atzle, Z. & No´e, F.  Deep-neural-network solution of the elec-
     tronic  schr¨odinger  equation.Nature  Chemistry12,  891–897  (2020).    URL
     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-020-0544-y.

[18]Foster, A.et al.An ab initio foundation model of wavefunctions that accurately
     describes chemical bond breaking (2025). URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.19960.
     arXiv:2506.19960.

[19]von Glehn, I., Spencer, J. S. & Pfau, D. A self-attention ansatz for ab-initio quan-
     tum chemistry (2023). URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13672.arXiv:2211.13672.

[20]Scherbela, M., Gerard, L. & Grohs, P.  Towards a transferable fermionic neural
     wavefunction for molecules.Nature Communications15, 120 (2024). URLhttps:
     //doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44216-9.

[21]Li,  R.et  al.A  computational  framework  for  neural  network-based  variational
     monte  carlo  with  forward  laplacian.Nature  Machine  Intelligence6,  209–219
     (2024).  URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00794-x.

[22]Moreno, J. R., Carleo, G., Georges, A. & Stokes, J. Fermionic wave functions from
     neural-network constrained hidden states.Proceedings of the National Academy
     of  Sciences119, e2122059119 (2022).  URLhttps://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.
     1073/pnas.2122059119.

[23]Kim,  J.et  al. Neural-network  quantum  states  for  ultra-cold  fermi  gases.
     Communications   Physics7,   148   (2024).       URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/
     s42005-024-01613-w.

[24]Lou, W. T.et al.Neural wave functions for superfluids.Phys. Rev. X14, 021030
     (2024).  URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.14.021030.


                                                    33
[25]Pfau, D., Axelrod, S., Sutterud, H., von Glehn, I. & Spencer, J. S. Accurate com-
     putation of quantum excited states with neural networks.Science385, eadn0137
     (2024).  URLhttps://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adn0137.

[26]Sorella, S. Green function monte carlo with stochastic reconfiguration.Phys. Rev.
     Lett.80, 4558–4561 (1998). URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
     80.4558.

[27]Rende,  R.,  Viteritti,  L.  L.,  Bardone,  L.,  Becca,  F.  &  Goldt,  S.     A  sim-
     ple  linear  algebra  identity  to  optimize  large-scale  neural  network  quantum
     states.Communications  Physics7, 260 (2024).  URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/
     s42005-024-01732-4.

[28]Neklyudov, K.et al.Oh, A.et al.(eds)Wasserstein quantum monte carlo: A novel
     approach  for  solving  the  quantum  many-body  schr¨odinger  equation.  (eds Oh, A.
     et al.)Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 36, 63461–63482
     (Curran Associates, Inc., 2023). URLhttps://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper                         files/
     paper/2023/file/c8450235f227f136242f774b2799581f-Paper-Conference.pdf.

[29]Webber, R. J. & Lindsey, M. Rayleigh-gauss-newton optimization with enhanced
     sampling for variational monte carlo.Phys.  Rev.  Res.4, 033099 (2022).  URL
     https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.033099.

[30]Goldshlager,  G.,  Abrahamsen,  N.  &  Lin,  L.   A  kaczmarz-inspired  approach  to
     accelerate the optimization of neural network wavefunctions.Journal  of  Com-
     putational  Physics516,  113351  (2024).   URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/
     science/article/pii/S0021999124005990.

[31]Drissi,  M.,  Keeble,  J.  W.  T.,  Rozal´en  Sarmiento,  J.  &  Rios,  A.   Second-order
     optimization strategies for neural network quantum states.Philosophical Trans-
     actions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
     382, 20240057 (2024).  URLhttps://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2024.0057.

[32]Peng, R. & Chan, G. K.-L. An analysis of first- and quasi-second-order optimiza-
     tion algorithms in variational monte carlo (2025).  URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/
     2502.19576. arXiv:2502.19576.

[33]Jiang,  D.et  al.  Neural  scaling  laws  surpass  chemical  accuracy  for  the  many-
     electron  schr¨odinger  equation  (2025).   URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02570.
     arXiv:2508.02570.

[34]Gu,  Y.et  al.Solving  the  hubbard  model  with  neural  quantum  states  (2025).
     URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02644. arXiv:2507.02644.

[35]M¨uller, J. & Zeinhofer, M. Salakhutdinov, R.et al.(eds)Position: Optimization in
     SciML should employ the function space geometry. (eds Salakhutdinov, R.et al.)
     Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 235


                                                    34
     ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, 36705–36722 (PMLR, 2024). URL
     https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/muller24d.html.

[36]Trefethen, L. N. & Bau, D.Numerical Linear Algebra(SIAM, 2022).

[37]Jiang, H.-C., Yao, H. & Balents, L. Spin liquid ground state of the spin-        12  square
     J1-J  2 heisenberg model.Phys. Rev. B86, 024424 (2012).  URLhttps://link.aps.
     org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.024424.

[38]Gong, S.-S., Zhu, W., Sheng, D. N., Motrunich, O. I. & Fisher, M. P. A. Plaquette
     ordered phase and quantum phase diagram in the spin- 12 J1−J    2 square heisenberg
     model.Phys.  Rev.  Lett.113, 027201 (2014).  URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.
     1103/PhysRevLett.113.027201.

[39]Ferrari, F. & Becca, F.  Gapless spin liquid and valence-bond solid in theJ              1-J  2
     heisenberg model on the square lattice: Insights from singlet and triplet excita-
     tions.Phys. Rev. B102, 014417 (2020). URLhttps://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
     PhysRevB.102.014417.

[40]Richter, J., Zinke, R. & Farnell, D. J. J. The spin-1/2 square-lattice j1-j2 model:
     the spin-gap issue. The European Physical Journal B88, 2 (2015).  URLhttps:
     //doi.org/10.1140/epjb/e2014-50589-x.

[41]Boumal, N.An  introduction  to  optimization  on  smooth  manifolds(Cambridge
     University Press, 2023).

[42]Stokes,  J.,  Izaac,  J.,  Killoran,  N.  &  Carleo,  G.   Quantum  Natural  Gradient.
     Quantum4, 269 (2020).  URLhttps://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-05-25-269.

[43]Toulouse, J. & Umrigar, C. J.  Optimization of quantum monte carlo wave func-
     tions  by  energy  minimization.The  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics126,  084102
     (2007).  URLhttps://doi.org/10.1063/1.2437215.

[44]Bradbury,  J.et  al. JAX:  composable  transformations  of  Python+NumPy
     programs (2018).  URLhttp://github.com/jax-ml/jax.

[45]Feischl, M., Lasser, C., Lubich, C. & Nick, J.  Regularized dynamical parametric
     approximation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19234(2024).

[46]Lubich,   C.   &   Nick,   J.      Regularized   dynamical   parametric   approximation
     of  stiff  evolution  problems  (2025).     URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12118.
     arXiv:2501.12118.

[47]Absil,  P.-A.,  Mahony,  R.  &  Sepulchre,  R.Optimization  Algorithms  on  Matrix
     Manifolds(Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2009).  URLhttps://doi.org/
     10.1515/9781400830244.




                                                    35
[48]Absil,  P.-A.,  Mahony,  R.  &  Sepulchre,  R.Optimization  algorithms  on  matrix
      manifolds(Princeton University Press, 2008).

[49]Vicentini, F.et al.NetKet 3: Machine Learning Toolbox for Many-Body Quantum
      Systems.SciPost Phys. Codebases7 (2022).  URLhttps://scipost.org/10.21468/
      SciPostPhysCodeb.7.

[50]Carleo,  G.et  al.Netket:  A  machine  learning  toolkit  for  many-body  quantum
      systems.SoftwareX10,  100311  (2019).   URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/
      science/article/pii/S2352711019300974.













































                                                     36