                           Scalable Physics-Inspired Transformers for Spin Glasses

                   Lu Zhong,1,∗  Wenli Duan,1,∗  Jing Liu,2, 3,†  Pan Zhang,3, 4,‡  and Ying Tang1, 5, 6, 7,§
                                              1Institute  of  Fundamental  and  Frontier  Sciences,
                         University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  Chengdu  611731,  China
  2School of Physical Science and Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
                      3Institute  of  Theoretical  Physics,  Chinese  Academy  of  Sciences,  Beijing  100190,  China
                                       4School  of  Fundamental  Physics  and  Mathematical  Sciences,
                               Hangzhou  Institute  for  Advanced  Study,  UCAS,  Hangzhou  310024,  China
             5School  of  Physics,  University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  Chengdu  611731,  China
                6Key  Laboratory  of  Quantum  Physics  and  Photonic  Quantum  Information,  Ministry  of  Education,
                         University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  Chengdu  611731,  China
                    7Non-classical  Information  Science  Basic  Discipline  Research  Center  of  Sichuan  Province,
                         University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  Chengdu  611731,  China
                   Efficient sampling of the Boltzmann distribution in frustrated spin glasses is central to statistical
                mechanics and combinatorial optimization.  Despite advances in machine-learning-based approaches,
                two issues persist:  limited understanding of why variational models fail to benefit from increased
                scale, unlike the monotonic scaling law of large language models; and high computational cost on
                large systems that negates advantages over classical sampling methods.  Here, we develop a physics-
                inspired transformer with interpretable sparse attention and spin-tailored positional embeddings to
                address these challenges.  By further leveraging FlashAttention for parallel ancestral sampling,  it
                achieves up to two orders of magnitude speedup over vanilla variational autoregressive networks,
                enabling neural-network simulations of spin-glass systems to unprecedented sizes on a single GPU. It
                can resolve full probability distributions, free energies, and overlap statistics across temperatures, for
                Sherrington-Kirkpatrick and 2D or 3D Edwards-Anderson models, where existing machine-learning
                methods encounter limitations at certain temperatures.  This framework thus establishes a scalable
                paradigm for frustrated spin-glass systems.




                                                             I.    INTRODUCTION

   Understanding the collective behavior of high-dimensional spin-glass models remains a central problem in statistical
mechanics and combinatorial optimization [1–4].  The paradigm spin-glass models, such as the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick
(SK) [5] and Edwards-Anderson (EA) [6], exhibit frustration, disorder, and rugged energy landscapes.  Characterizing
these systems, especially in high dimensions and with large sizes, requires resolving exponentially increasing probability
distributions over spin configurations. The conventional sampling approaches, including Markov chain Monte Carlo [7],
often struggle to equilibrate in the rugged energy landscape, especially near phase transitions where correlation times
become extremely long.  Consequently, understanding the free-energy landscape, ground state, and phase structure of
general spin glasses remains an outstanding theoretical and computational problem in physics.
   Recent advances in machine learning have opened new possibilities for modeling complex spin-glass systems.  In
particular,  variational  autoregressive  networks  (VANs)  [8]  offer  a  powerful  method  by  enabling  parallel  ancestral
sampling from learned Boltzmann distributions.  VANs and related generative models have been applied to equilibrium
statistical mechanics [9,10], quantum many-body systems [11–17], and nonequilibrium dynamics [18–20]. Yet a critical
limitation  lies  in  the  model  scalability:  unlike  large  language  models,  which  often  exhibit  consistent  performance
gains  with  increasing  scale,  autoregressive  models  for  spin-glass  systems  show  no  clear  scaling  advantage.   Deeper
architectures  or  more  sophisticated  designs  (e.g.,  transformers)  do  not  necessarily  yield  better  performance,  while
often lacking the physical inductive biases needed to capture spin correlations.  Thus, practitioners have predominantly
relied on simpler architectures such as MADE [21] or NADE [22,23],  whereas these models suffer from degrading
performance over increasing system sizes, restricting them to relatively small systems.
   Besides  modeling  the  full  probability  distribution  at  finite  temperature,  the  scalability  bottleneck  also  limits
machine-learning methods in the task of searching for ground states at low temperature.  The VAN-assisted Monte
Carlo  simulations  have  been  used  but  found  to  struggle  on  computationally  hard  problems  [24],  motivating  more




∗ These authors contributed equally
† Corresponding authors:jing.liu@bupt.edu.cn
‡ Corresponding authors:panzhang@itp.ac.cn
§ Corresponding authors:jamestang23@gmail.com
                                                                                                                                                           2

dedicated graph-neural architectures to capture long-range correlations [25].  In parallel, reinforcement-learning ap-
proaches  for  searching  spin-glass  ground  states  at  low  temperatures  have  also  been  proposed  [26],  although  their
accuracy was debated [27, 28].  This  trade-off between  architectural expressivity  and computational feasibility has
left large-scale SK and EA models beyond the reach of the previous machine-learning methods.  Developing scalable
neural-network approaches that circumvent these barriers while faithfully capturing complex probability distributions
across temperatures remains an urgent and unsolved problem.
   Here, we address these challenges by introducing a physics-inspired transformer built on an interpretable sparse-
attention mechanism motivated by large language models such as DeepSeek [29].  This attention pattern explicitly
encodes  the  interaction  topology  of  spin  systems,  enabling  a  more  faithful  representation  of  lattice  geometry  and
coupling structure.  We also design positional embeddings tailored to spin systems suitable for modeling long-range
correlations.  We further include a hardware-efficient implementation:  by leveraging FlashAttention kernels together
with key-value (KV) caching for efficient autoregressive sampling, as developed for modern transformers [30–32], the
present framework makes training and sampling practical at substantially larger scales.  To strengthen performance
in  challenging  low-temperature  regimes,  we  introduce  a  training  strategy  that  combines  local  Monte  Carlo  refine-
ment with self-distillation, improving optimization stability while promoting exploration among low-energy valleys.
Combined with modern optimization techniques [33], this framework delivers substantial gains in both computational
efficiency and accuracy.
   The present framework accurately resolves free energies, Boltzmann and overlap distributions across temperatures
for the paradigmatic SK and EA spin-glass models in both two and three dimensions. It also identifies low-temperature
ground states that remain challenging for previous reinforcement-learning approaches [26–28].  On a single GPU, it
scales  to  systems  with  4,096  spins  (Table.I),  extending  the  accessible  size  range  beyond  previous  neural-network
methods  [34–36].   It  achieves  up  to  two  orders  of  magnitude  speedup  over  the  vanilla  VAN  [8]  and  improves  on
recent  natural-gradient  variants  [35].   Beyond  the  recent  observations  underlying  Global  Annealing  (GA)  [37],  our
results further show that machine-learning-assisted sampling can be robust over a broader temperature range, while
avoiding  expensive  population-based  updates  required  by  annealing-based  approaches.   These  results  establish  a
scalable framework for exploring glassy phase structure in frustrated spin systems at unprecedented scales.

TABLE I. Comparison of the largest system size reported for the machine-learning methods on the benchmark models.  Ap-
proaches include the vanilla VAN [8], variational neural annealing (VNA) [34], ng-VAN [35], two-body interactions (TwoBo) [36],
nearest-neighbors neural network (4N) [25], GA [37], and our FlashVAN (on a single GPU). Values represent the maximum
system sizeNreported.  NA: Not available, as it was not reported in the original literature.

Model                  VAN                 VNA                 ng-VAN                 TwoBo                 4N                   GA                  FlashVAN
SK                        100                   100                       30                        NA                    NA                  NA                        256
2D EA                  NA                  3,600                    NA                      1,024                  256                  NA                      3,600
3D EA                  NA                   NA                      NA                      1,728                  NA                 2,744                     4,096




                                                                   II.    RESULTS

                                                                   A.    Framework

   Consider a spin system of sizeN, whose configurationsσ∈{±1}                     N  follow the Boltzmann distribution

                                                                   p(σ) =   e−βE(σ)Z  ,                                                                         (1)

whereβ= 1/Tis the inverse temperature andZis the partition function.  The VAN [8] can approximate this target
distribution through a tractable autoregressive factorization,q           θ(σ) =  QNi=1 qθ(σ i|σ <i), allowing for direct sampling.
It can yield accurate estimates of thermodynamic observables, such as the free energyF=−(1/β) lnZby minimizing
the Kullback-Leibler (KL)-divergence betweenq   θ andp, and the ground-state energyE                0 = minσE(σ).
   Despite its success, existing VANs still exhibit notable limitations in both representational focus and computational
scalability [8].  First, current transformer-based VANs tend to focus excessively on the content information encoded in
spin states, while paying insufficient attention to the positional relationships among spins.  A key distinction between
spin systems and natural language lies in the nature of their tokens:  tokens in natural language carry rich semantic
meaning,  whereas spin tokens are merely symbolic states (+1/−1) conveying limited intrinsic information.  That
is,  for spin systems,  it is not the content of each token but its positional and relational structure that defines the
physical configuration.  Several recent studies have also noted that detailed pairwise correlations between spin values
A    Framework                                                                                                                                                              3



















































FIG. 1.The present framework facilitates solving spin-glass problems.(a) Schematic illustration of representative
spin-glass systems.  (b) Optimization workflow: a parameterized joint distribution, termed FlashVAN, is trained to approximate
the Boltzmann distribution of a given Hamiltonian by minimizing the KL-divergence, with free-energy gradients taken with
respect to the model parameters.  (c) Architecture:  featuring CUDA kernel acceleration modules, a physics-inspired attention
mechanism, and a tailored positional embedding design, which together enhance expressivity and accuracy.  (d) Training results
show the convergence of the free energy and ground-state energy under the temperature-annealing scheme.  (e) Computational
performance,  demonstrating  a  substantial  speedup  over  vanilla  VAN  approaches  including  faster  sampling  procedures,  and
favorable scaling of computational time with system sizes.


are often irrelevant for modeling global distributions [38]; for example, replacing the attention weights with a factored
(query-key-independent)  attention  matrix  can  still  yield  competitive  performance  in  certain  structured  tasks  [39].
Second, existing VAN implementations, particularly those based on transformer architectures, have not leveraged the
latest hardware-efficient algorithms that have become standard in large language models (LLMs).  As a result, their
scalability remains constrained by quadratic attention complexity and large memory overhead.
   To  tackle  these  challenges,  we  propose  a  physics-inspired,  position-aware,  and  hardware-efficient  autoregressive
model designed for large-scale spin systems.  We term it Flash Variational Autoregressive Network (FlashVAN) to
highlight  its  accelerated  computational  performance  and  its  variational  formulation.   Specifically,  we  employ  the
physics-inspired sparse attention and develop a new positional embedding mechanism tailored for spin systems, which
provides  richer  structural  representations  and  effectively  characterizes  spatial  correlations  across  different  models,
A    Framework                                                                                                                                                              4

including two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) lattices.  In addition, we integrate FlashAttention-based
acceleration [31,32], which substantially reduces the computational cost of parallel ancestral sampling and autore-
gressive forward evaluation, enabling efficient training at unprecedented system sizes for neural-network approaches
to spin-glass systems on a single GPU.



                                                     1.    Physics-inspired sparse attention

  The  design  of  our  attention  mechanism  is  physically  rooted  in  the  locality  of  interactions  inherent  to  two-body
Hamiltonians.  Standard autoregressive transformer architectures employ full causal self-attention,  which evaluates
global  dependencies  across  the  entire  generated  sequence.   However,  the  local  topological  structure  of  lattice  spin
models allows for rigorous truncation of this attention span without compromising representational accuracy (Supple-
mentary Figure 2).  This strategy parallels other physics-inspired autoregressive frameworks, such as TwoBo [36] and
tensor network Monte Carlo algorithms [40–42], which explicitly exploit the properties of exact conditional probability
in systems with nearest-neighbor interactions.  More specifically, for a 2D spin model with open boundary conditions,
the exact conditional probabilityp(σ   i|σ <i) is entirely determined by the boundary spins that separate the sampled
region from the unsampled region (Fig.1c).  Consequently, predicting the state of siteidoes not require an attention
mechanism spanning the entire sequence history fromi−1 down to 1.  Instead, the essential physical dependencies
are strictly localized within a receptive field that corresponds to the most recentO(L) sites.
  Guided by this physical intuition, FlashVAN can implement a physics-inspired sparse attention mechanism restricted
to  a  local  window  of  sizeL.   This  truncation  reduces  the  memory  footprint  and  computational  complexity  of  the
attention block.  Crucially, this structured sparsity pattern integrates seamlessly with FlashAttention kernels, which
facilitates further acceleration of training.  This physical insight extends naturally to higher dimensions, e.g., in a 3D
lattice of linear sizeL, the effective boundary mediating conditional dependence scales with the cross-sectional area,
which yields a requisite attention window of sizeO(L             2) (Section IA, Supplementary Information).



                                                            2.    Positional embedding

  We  find  that  the  performance  of  VANs  is  highly  sensitive  to  the  representation  of  positional  information.   To
investigate this sensitivity, we systematically evaluated a range of positional encoding strategies across physical models
with  varying  topological  complexities.   For  the  Ising  model,  which  is  characterized  by  a  simple  lattice  structure,
a  learnable  additive  (absolute)  positional  embedding  is  sufficient.   However,  for  the  more  intricate  Sherrington–
Kirkpatrick (SK) model, additive embeddings induce pronounced oscillations in the variational free-energy convergence
at low temperatures (Supplementary Figure 4).  For more structured spin systems, such as the 2D and 3D Edwards–
Anderson  (EA)  models,  incorporating  relative  positional  information  yields  additional  empirical  gains,  suggesting
that relative positional embeddings, such as 2D or 3D RoPE [43], are also a promising design choice.  One possible
explanation is that, for networks with limited depth, encoding positional variance solely through additive offsets tends
to conflate spatial and state information, undermining the model’s ability to resolve individual spins and triggering
these instabilities.  To overcome this, we design a concatenated positional embedding (Fig.1c) that integrates token
and positional vectors into a unified yet distinct representation.  This approach improves convergence across a broad
range of temperatures and leads to higher accuracy.
  The training results of FlashVAN advance our understanding of the role of positional embeddings in VANs:  rather
than attributing instability to a lack of expressivity in autoregressive models,  we find that providing accurate and
sufficient  positional  information during model design  and training is crucial  for stable and  efficient learning.  This
suggests that, in non-language modalities such as spin systems, performance gains may come primarily from properly
encoding positional structure rather than from content-based embeddings as in natural language processing.  A more
detailed analysis of the effects of different positional embeddings is provided in Methods Sec.IV A 2.



                                                             3.    Overall architecture

  We next introduce the overall architecture of FlashVAN, which features a specialized positional embedding scheme
and is equipped withFlashAttention-2[44] for efficient training.  The backbone of FlashVAN follows the standard
transformer framework:  as in other transformer-based neural ansatzes [45–47], it consists of a stack of decoder layers,
each containing a self-attention layer followed by a feed-forward network (FFN). Fig.1c provides an overview of the
model architecture.
A    Framework                                                                                                                                                              5

  Given a spin configurationσ={σ                                    1,σ2,...,σN}of lengthN, each spin is linearly projected into ad-dimensional
embedding space using the concatenated positional embedding as in Eq. (15), producing a sequence of input vectors
(x  1,x 2,...,x N).  For higher-dimensional spin systems (e.g.,N=L                 2  in 2D andN=L               3  in 3D), the configuration
is flattened into a 1D sequence using a raster-scan ordering over the spatial dimensions.  In all cases, the resulting
sequence is processed in the same manner as the 1D input.  Each decoder layer contains a masked multi-head attention
layer followed by an FFN. For the attention layer, letn  h denote the number of attention heads,d     h the dimension per
head, andh   t∈R d the input to the attention block for thet-th token:

                                                    □t =W  □ht = [□ t,1  ;□ t,2  ;...;□  t,nh],                                                          (2)

where□     t∈{q t,k t,v t},W  □∈{W Q,W K,W V}∈R dhnh×d    are the projection matrices for queries, keys, and values,
respectively, and [·;·] denotes concatenation.  The attention outputs are computed as:

                                                               tX              q⊤t,ikj,i  !
                                                     ot,i =       Softmaxj         √dh       vj,i,                                                  (3)
                                                             j=1
                                                      ut = [o t,1  ;o t,2  ;...;o  t,nh].

Different from the standard transformer architecture, the final output projectionW    O is bypassed.
  To  accelerate  computation,  we  employ  theFlashAttention-2CUDA  kernel  for  efficient  attention  calculation,
which significantly reduces memory bandwidth overhead during training.  In addition, we integrate a key-value (KV)
cache strategy to improve sampling efficiency.  Implementation details can be found in Methods SectionIV B.


                                               4.    Optimization:  free energy and ground state

  Next, we present the training strategy used for FlashVAN. The optimization follows a reinforcement learning style
scheme, allowing the model to learn directly from sampled configurations without relying on Markov chains.  For a
given problem instance, estimating the free energyF=−(1/β) lnZrequires an accurate approximation ofZ, which
is generally intractable to compute directly.  To circumvent this, VAN introduces a variational distributionq          θ(σ) and
minimizes the KL divergence to learn the Boltzmann distribution [8]:

                                           DKL(q θ∥p) =  Xqθ(σ) ln  qθ(σ)p(σ)        =β(F   q−F)≥0,                                               (4)
                                                              σ
where the variational free energy is defined as
                                                              X
                                                    Fq =  1β       qθ(σ) βE(σ) + lnq     θ(σ) ,                                                         (5)
                                                               σ
minimizingF         q therefore provides an upper bound to the true free energyF.
  FlashVAN optimizesF        q  using a score-function estimator (REINFORCE [48]) with a  variance-reduction baseline
and hardware-efficient sampling (KV cache + FlashAttention).  We optimize the parametersθusing Muon [33],  a
recently proposed optimizer originally developed for LLMs.  In our experiments,  Muon exhibits stable convergence
while maintaining comparable computational efficiency (Supplementary Information, Section III).
  This self-sampling and self-training approach eliminates the need for Markov chains, enabling efficient and inde-
pendent sampling directly on GPUs while allowing the exact computation of lnq  θ(σ).  The runtime cost per training
step is dominated by sampling, which constitutes the main bottleneck for scaling VANs to larger systems.  To mitigate
this, we implement FlashVAN with a KV-cache sampling procedure (Algorithm2).  By caching past key-value vectors
during autoregressive generation, we avoid redundant recomputation and further boost performance using FlashAt-
tention CUDA kernels.  Supplementary Figure 7 provides a per-step runtime comparison between vanilla VANs and
FlashVAN  across  system  scales.   With  the  optimized  sampling  pipeline,  the  total  wall-clock  time  required  by  our
model is approximately 19.85 minutes for 4,000 training steps on the SK model (N= 256), corresponding to tasks
such as free energy estimation.  For the 2D EA model (N= 60      2), the runtime is about 4.83 hours for 6,600 training
steps.  All experiments are performed on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU.
  For estimating the ground-state energy, the same training framework applies, augmented with an annealing scheme.
As temperature is annealed (T↓),  the entropic contribution inF    q  (proportional toT) vanishes,  and the objective
reduces to minimizingE         qθ[E(σ)], yielding the ground-state energy in theT→0 limit.  The annealing strategy we adopt
can be found in Methods Sec.IV C 2.  At low temperatures, however, training is especially sensitive to mode collapse:
A    Framework                                                                                                                                                              6

accurate  overlap  distributions  and  reliable  ground-state  search  require  both  exploration  of  competing  valleys  and
concentration on low-energy configurations.  We therefore combine the variational objective with local Monte Carlo
refinement and a self-distillation loss.  This design, motivated by the observation in the GA study that generative-
model samples become substantially more useful after local Monte Carlo relaxation [37], is a key ingredient in the
results discussed below.


                                                     B.    Application to spin glass systems

   We have evaluated our FlashVAN on a variety of classical statistical physics systems,  including the SK and EA
models (Table.I). The experimental results show that FlashVAN achieves accurate reconstruction of the Boltzmann
distribution and estimates key thermodynamic quantities such as the free energy and ground-state energy.


                                                          1.    Sherrington–Kirkpatrick model































FIG. 2.FlashVAN efficiently gives accurate free energy and ground-state energy for the SK model.(a) Illustrated
SK model with random interactionsJ        ij.  (b) Free-energy convergence for various system sizesNatβ= 0.5 relative to the
thermodynamic limit (dashed).  (c) Efficiency comparison between traditional transformer-VAN and FlashVAN: runtime vs.
batch  size  (top)  and  training  throughput  (bottom).   (d)  Ground-state  energy  trajectories  during  annealing  (N=  256)  for
three  disorder  instances  (solid)  against  the  finite-size  corrections  (FSC)-derived  exact  value  (dashed).   The  inset  shows  the
temperature  annealing  schedule.   (e)  Accuracy  versus  inverse  temperatureβ,  shown  by  the  variance  of  the  estimated  free
energy forN= 30 andN= 256, while the inset reports the relative error|f−f                                      exact|/|f     exact|forN= 30.  (f) Extrapolation of
ensemble-averaged ground-state energy versus size.  The cross (×) marks the RSB solution [49] at⟨e                 0⟩N=∞      =−0.763(2), with
the fitted line by Eq. (7).

   The SK model is a classical benchmark for spin-glass behavior, defined onNbinary spinsσ= (σ                        1,...,σN) with
σi∈{±1}.  Its Hamiltonian is
                                                                                   X
                                                              H(σ) =−            1√N     Jijσiσj,                                                                 (6)
                                                                                    i<j

where the off-diagonal couplingsJ        ij  fori<jare independent and identically distributed Gaussian random variables
with  mean  zero  and  unit  variance,  andJ   ij  =J ji  withJ    ii  =  0.   With  the  1/ √Nscaling,  the  energy  density  has
a  well-behaved  thermodynamic  limit.   Owing  to  full  connectivity  and  strong  frustration,  the  SK  energy  landscape
B    Application to spin glass systems                                                                                                                            7

contains a profusion of local minima; accordingly, vanilla VANs often struggle to capture the long-range correlations
and complex disorder structure present in this model.
   We first evaluate variational fitting and free-energy estimation at a fixed nonzero temperature to test FlashVAN’s
ability to approximate the Boltzmann distributionp(σ).  Fig.2b shows the convergence of the estimated free energy
during training forN= 64,128,256.  AsNincreases,  the converged values move toward the thermodynamic-limit
referenceF     ∞≈−1.5112.  We further compare the runtime and computational throughput of FlashVAN with a tradi-
tional transformer-based VAN. As shown in Fig.2c, the transformer-VAN runtime increases rapidly with batch size,
whereas FlashVAN remains nearly constant over the tested range.  Measured throughput (GFLOPs/s) is consistently
higher for FlashVAN, with speedup increasing as the sequence length grows,  reaching up to 58.34×at a sequence
length of 512.  These results indicate substantially improved GPU utilization for FlashVAN during both training and
sampling (timing protocol is detailed in the Supplementary Information).
   We next evaluate FlashVAN on the task of estimating the ground-state energy of the SK model.  Fig.2d shows
the evolution of the estimated energy density forN= 256.  Following the annealing strategy described in Methods
Sec.IV C 2,  the  temperature  is  gradually  decreased  toward  zero  during  training.   Consistent  with  this  schedule,
the  optimization  transitions  from  a  high-temperature  regime  (where  entropy  contributes  more  strongly)  to  a  low-
temperature  regime  where  the  objective  approaches  the  internal  energy,  and  the  estimate  stabilizes  near  the  final
ground-state value obtained from finite-size scaling for this system size. Using the same training configuration (number
of headsn     heads = 4, token embedding dimensiond                    token = 2, position embedding dimensiond                    pos = 254 and number of
layersn  layers = 2), we test three independent disorder instances.  All three runs converge to consistent ground-state
energy estimates close to the reference value.
   Fig.2e summarizes the estimation accuracy across inverse temperaturesβ.  We report the variance of the estimated
free energy Var[f] forN= 30 andN= 256, which remains below 10        −4    over the testedβrange.  ForN= 30, we
additionally compute the exact free energyf             exact by exhaustive enumeration.  The inset of Fig.2e shows the relative
error|f−f                 exact|/|f     exact|, which stays on the order of 10−6 ∼10 −4  .  These results indicate that FlashVAN provides
accurate free-energy estimates from high to low temperatures within the evaluated regime.
   For  disorder  ensembles  such  as  SK  and  EA,  the  disorder-averaged  ground-state  energy  density  admits  a  well-
defined thermodynamic limit asN→∞.  In practice, this limit is approached in a systematic way through finite-size
corrections (FSC). Denoting the thermodynamic-limit value by⟨e    0⟩N=∞     , a commonly used asymptotic form is [27]:

                                                   ⟨e  0⟩N∼⟨e  0⟩N=∞     + ANω  +...,N→∞,                                                       (7)

whereAis  a  constant  andω(>0)  is  the  correction  exponent.   While  additional  subleading  terms  or  alternative
correction forms may be present,  checking whether finite-Ndata are consistent with this scaling provides a useful
baseline for assessing how well a heuristic method extrapolates toward the large-Nregime.
   As shown in Fig.2f, in the case of SK, the replica-symmetry-breaking (RSB) prediction provides the thermodynamic-
limit ground state energy density⟨e    0⟩N=∞      =−0.763(2), marked by×. The FSC fit usesA≈0.70(1) and the correction
exponentω= 2/3.  We train FlashVAN forN= 64,128,256, usingn= 3000, 726, 162 independent disorder instances,
respectively (each generated by an independent draw ofJ  ij).  The resulting estimates follow the FSC trend closely,
supporting the scalability of FlashVAN to larger system sizes.


                                                       2.    Edwards–Anderson model in 2D

   The EA Ising spin-glass model is defined in general dimensionDby

                                                                 H=−  XJijσiσj,                                                                        (8)
                                                                           ⟨ij⟩
whereσ     i∈{±1}are Ising spins,  and the summation⟨ij⟩runs over all nearest-neighbor pairs on aD-dimensional
lattice.  The couplingsJ    ij are independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and unit variance.  For Gaussian
disorder, the ground state is almost surely unique up to a global spin flip for any finite system.  Each specific realization
of{J  ij}is referred to as an instance of the disorder.  In the following, we first present results for the 2D case, where
the system size isN=L          2; results for the 3D case will be discussed in the next section.
   To assess whether the learned model captures equilibrium properties of the EA spin glass, we analyze the overlap
between two statistically independent replicas sampled at the same temperature for a fixed disorder instance.  The
overlap (similarity) between two such configurationsσ                             1 andσ        2 is defined as:

                                                                                      NX
                                                          q=    1N σ1·σ 2 =  1N           σ1iσ2i.                                                                (9)
                                                                                     i=1
B    Application to spin glass systems                                                                                                                            8































FIG. 3.FlashVAN generates accurate ground-state energy and overlap distribution for the 2D EA model.(a)
Illustrated  2D  EA  model,  where  spins  are  arranged  on  a  square  lattice  and  coupled  via  nearest-neighbor  interactions.   The
couplingJ       ij can be ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic.  (b) Probability distributions of the overlapq(defined in Eq. (9)).  The
solid lines from FlashVAN match the dashed lines from PT and Kac-Ward formula [50].  (c) Residual energy per site versus
system size L for open and periodic boundary conditions.  Data are averaged over 20 disorder instances.


The overlap distributionp(q) is a sensitive diagnostic of spin-glass structure and has been widely used to characterize
equilibrium behavior.  Fig.3b compares the overlap distributions obtained from FlashVAN with those generated by
parallel tempering (PT) and Kac-Ward formula [50], which serve as high-quality equilibrium references, at temper-
atureT=  0.31  for  four  representative  disorder  instances.   In  all  four  cases,  FlashVAN  accurately  reproduces  the
complex,  multi-peaked  structure ofp(q),  indicating that  the learned  sampling  distribution  is consistent with  equi-
librium statistics in the low-temperature regime.  Details of training and model architecture are in Supplementary
Information, Section I.
   We next evaluate the performance of FlashVAN in estimating the ground-state energy across different system sizes
and boundary conditions. Specifically, we consider system sizes spanning fromL= 8 to 60, with either open or periodic
boundary conditions.  For each instance, FlashVAN predicts the ground-state energye             pred0    , which is compared against
the exact valuee        exact0       obtained usingMcGroundState[51].  Fig.3c reports the residual energyϵ                                                                        res =|e     pred0 −e    exact0 |.
As shown, the residuals remain at the level of 10−5 ∼10 −3  , indicating FlashVAN’s consistent instance-wise accuracy.
We observe a modest increase in the residuals for periodic boundary conditions at the largest system size, suggesting
that periodic boundaries introduce a more challenging optimization landscape.  Nevertheless, the accuracy remains
within the same order of magnitude over the evaluated range.
   Recent transformer-based neural samplers have also been applied to 2D EA systems of comparable size, reaching
64×64  spins  in  finite-temperature  Boltzmann-distribution  sampling  [52].   Compared  with  this  setting,  FlashVAN
provides substantially shorter training times, as reported above, while covering both temperature-dependent overlap
distributions and low-temperature ground-state energy estimates.


                                                       3.    Edwards–Anderson model in 3D

   We next consider the more challenging 3D EA model.  We use the overlap distributionp(q) as the benchmark to
evaluate the performance of FlashVAN and compare it with other algorithms.  As shown in Fig.4b, we reproduce the
setting as described in [37].  The gray histogram represents the equilibrium overlap distribution obtained from PT.
FlashVAN achieves the best agreement with the PT reference across all four temperature points, ranging from the high-
temperature regime (T= 1.92) down to the low-temperature regime (T= 0.1).  FlashVAN can faithfully represent
B    Application to spin glass systems                                                                                                                            9































FIG. 4.Accurate ground state and overlap distribution across temperatures for the 3D EA model by FlashVAN.
(a) Illustrated 3D EA model, where spins are coupled by random nearest-neighbor interactionsJ        ij. (b) The overlap distributions
P(q)  at  four  representative  temperatures  for  system  sizeL=  10.   PA,  GA,  and  FlashVAN  are  in  different  columns,  where
FlashVAN achieves consistently high accuracy across temperatures.  Black curves with shade are from PT [37] as baseline.  (c)
Finite-size scaling of the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy,  for assessing the scalability of optimization heuristics [27].
Open circles denote results by FlashVAN forN= 4         3,6 3,8 3,10 3,14 3 and 163, averaged overn= 1110,651,300,50,40,20 disorder
instances, respectively.  Open squares denote the available PT benchmark results from [53].  The solid line shows the FSC fit
with the thermodynamic-limit value from RSB [49].  The close agreement between the FlashVAN results and the FSC scaling
curve demonstrates its scalability and high accuracy.


highly  complex  probability  distributions  and  therefore  can  serve  as  a  high-quality  sampler.   Population  Annealing
(PA) agrees with the reference distribution at most temperatures but breaks down at the lowest temperature, failing
to reproduce the correct peak weights andq= 0 symmetry.  GA exhibits the opposite trend, with weaker agreement
at intermediate temperatures but improved performance at low temperatures (results for PA and GA are from [37]).
   The superior performance of FlashVAN can be attributed to the incorporation of local Monte Carlo updates and
a modification of the training loss.  As described in MethodsIV C 1, the gradient takes the form of a score-function
estimator  (REINFORCE  [48]).   However,  directly  applying  this  loss  to  estimate  the  overlap  distribution  at  low
temperatures leads to mode collapse.  This behavior can be understood as arising from an objective that resembles
the reverse KL divergence, which is known to be mode-seeking and therefore reduces exploration by concentrating
probability mass on a limited set of configurations.
   We introduce a simple yet effective loss function modification to mitigate this issue.  Specifically, the modified objec-
tive interpolates between a reverse-KL-driven exploration term and a likelihood-based regularization term, stabilizing
training at low temperatures.  Compared to the original loss gradient (Eq. (19)), the modified loss gradient is:

                                                  MX    L(σ     (m)    )−
                                 ∇θFq∝  1M                             L∇θ lnq  θ(σ  (m)    )−w·∇    θ lnq  θ(σ  (m)    ),                                (10)
                                                 m=1

wherewcontrols  the  relative  weight  of  the  additional  term−w·∇             θ lnq  θ(σ  (m)    ).   This  term  can  be  interpreted  as
introducing  a  maximum-likelihood-type  regularization.   Another  important  modification  concerns  the  sampling  of
these configurations:  instead of using the raw samples generated by FlashVAN, we refine the raw samples by using a
short local Monte Carlo procedure [37] before evaluating the loss.
   Together, these two changes constitute a form of teacher distillation, in which local Monte Carlo dynamics provide
physically inspired guidance during training.  The added likelihood term guides the model toward assigning higher
probability to physically relevant configurations,  while the original reverse-KL-like term maintains sufficient explo-
ration.  With this improved training strategy, FlashVAN consistently reproduces the overlap distribution across all
                                                                                                                                                 10

four temperatures and achieves close agreement with the PT reference, outperforming both GA and PA. Additional
results illustrating the role of these two changes are provided in Section IC of the Supplementary Information.
  All results discussed above correspond to a system size ofN= 10        3.  To further assess the scalability of FlashVAN,
we  perform  a  finite-size  scaling  analysis  of  the  ensemble-averaged  ground-state  energy  density,  following  the  same
procedure  as  in  the  SK  case.   The  FSC  fit  (Eq.  (7))  uses  a  constantA≈1.641,  and  the  correction  component
ω= 1−θ/d≈0.92, and the thermodynamic limit for the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy density⟨e                         0⟩N=∞  ≈
−1.701.  As shown in Fig.4c, the average energy per spin computed by FlashVAN agrees well with the FSC fit across
system sizes ranging from 43  to 163, demonstrating strong scalability to large three-dimensional spin-glass systems.
For comparison, we also include the available PT benchmark results from [53].  The open squares denote PT results
forN= 4         3,6 3,8 3, and 103, averaged over 2×10      5, 2×10      4, 3×10      3, and 1.3×10          3  disorder instances, respectively.
The agreement of FlashVAN with both the FSC scaling curve and the available PT benchmarks supports its accuracy
across system sizes.






                                                            III.    DISCUSSION


  We  have  developed  FlashVAN,  an  autoregressive  framework  that  integrates  physics-inspired  attention,  tailored
positional  embeddings  and  hardware-efficient  acceleration.   In  particular,  FlashVAN  achieves  up  to  two  orders-of-
magnitude  acceleration  over  vanilla  VANs  while  maintaining  high  accuracy  across  a  range  of  benchmark  models,
including the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick and Edwards–Anderson systems.  It enables efficient single-GPU sampling at
unprecedented  system  sizes  for  neural-network  approaches  to  spin-glass  systems,  while  the  validated  benchmarks
reported here emphasize quantitative accuracy in thermodynamic observables, ground-state estimates, and represen-
tative overlap-distribution diagnostics.
  Our results suggest that scalability arises from combining physically inspired architectural design with a tailored
training strategy.  Performance emerges from aligning model inductive biases with the structure of disordered systems,
together with training procedures that stabilize learning in rugged energy landscapes.  Specifically, the combination
of local Monte Carlo refinement and self-distillation proves essential under forward KL training,  especially in low-
temperature regimes where the target distribution becomes highly structured.  Extending to larger or more frustrated
systems may require improved sampling and refinement strategies to provide high-quality training signals, pointing
to a continued interplay between Monte Carlo methods and learned generative models.
  The neural networks and tensor networks [54] each excel in different aspects.  The tensor-network, such as matrix
product states and projected entangled pair states,  have achieved remarkable success in one- and two-dimensional
systems separately.  Their extension to high-dimensional or highly connected systems can be constrained by the rapidly
increasing bond dimension.  Recent advances, including tensor network Markov chain Monte Carlo [55], alleviate this
issue, yet remain tied to structured decompositions and lattice geometry.  Instead, FlashVAN naturally accommodates
diverse interaction topologies and learns the probability distribution across a wide range of temperatures.  Hybridizing
neural and tensor-network approaches, by leveraging the scalability of neural networks and the precision of tensor-
network representations, offers a promising route for investigating more complex spin systems.
  More broadly, this work underscores the value of combining physical principles with advances in large-scale language
modeling.  Future work may explore adaptive sparsity patterns, improved optimization strategies, and more stringent
benchmark  comparisons  based  on  distributional  observables.   In  particular,  upon  completing  this  manuscript,  we
became aware of the recent large-scale Monte Carlo study [56], which provides new low-temperature benchmark data
for the three-dimensional Edwards-Anderson spin glass, with high-statistics equilibrated simulations reachingL= 16.
Their  results  offer  a  timely  and  complementary  reference  for  assessing  learned  neural-network  samplers  through
overlap-distribution  observables.   The  finite-size  analysis  of  the  ensemble-averaged  ground-state  energy  in  Fig.4
indicates the potential of FlashVAN to handle larger system sizes, and the representativeL= 10 overlap-distribution
benchmarks  suggest  that  FlashVAN  can  capture  nontrivial  structure  inP(q)  beyond  thermodynamic  averages.   A
systematic investigation comparing the method in [56] and the neural-network approach would be another natural
and important direction for future work.  Beyond equilibrium classical spin systems, the present framework can also
be extended to dynamical settings, including glassy dynamics [57] modeled by kinetically constrained models [19,58],
and to quantum many-body problems.  These directions point toward a general paradigm in which physically grounded
modeling and modern machine learning architectures jointly enable scalable and accurate solutions to large-size and
strongly correlated systems.
A    Detailed architectures in FlashVAN                                                                                                                      11

                                                                  IV.    METHODS

                                                 A.    Detailed architectures in FlashVAN

   In this section, we present the pseudocode (Algorithm1) outlining the implementation steps of the FlashVAN used
in this study, as described in the Results section.  Compared with conventional decoder-only transformer architectures,
our design differs in two key aspects:  the physics-inspired attention mechanism and the use of concatenated positional
embeddings.  The former is crucial for scaling FlashVAN to larger system sizes, while the latter significantly enhances
the expressive capacity of FlashVAN.

Algorithm 1FlashVAN
 1:Input configurationσ∈{−1,+1}                    N
 2:Concatenate Positional Embed:X←(x                1,...x N)∈R  d
 3:fori= 1,n      l do
 4: X←X+ MHA(LayerNorm(X))                                      ▷physics-inspired attention
 5: X←LayerNorm(X)
 6: X←X+ FFN(X)
 7:end for
 8:(z     1,...z N)←OutputHead(X)
 9:log[q(σ)]←    PNi=1  log(softmax(z        i)σi)



                                     1.    Autoregressive factorization and the ordered Markov boundary

   Consider an Ising model defined on a graphG= (V,E) with|V|=Nspins, whereE={(i,j) :i,j∈V,i̸=j}
denotes the set of edges encoding pairwise interactions.  The Ising model naturally defines a Markov random field
(MRF) whose joint distributionP(σ) follows the Boltzmann distribution.  Thelocal  Markov  propertyof the MRF
states  that  each  spins   i  is  conditionally  independent  of  all  other  spins  given  its  immediate  neighbors  (itsMarkov
blanket).
   To enable autoregressive sampling we impose a fixed total ordering≺on the vertex setV(for example, a raster
scan).  This ordering gives an exact factorization of the joint distribution via the chain rule:

                                                                          NY
                                                              P(σ) =          P(σ  i|σ≺i  ),                                                                  (11)
                                                                         i=1

whereσ   ≺i    denotes the configuration of all spins precedingiunder the ordering.  LetP         i ={j∈V:j≺i}be the set
of “past” (already sampled) spins andF   i ={j∈V:j≻i}the set of “future” (not yet sampled) spins.  Because of
the Markov properties of the underlying graph, the autoregressive conditionalP(σ   i|σ Pi) need not depend on the
entire pastP   i.  One can therefore identify a minimal conditioning set, which we call theordered Markov boundary.
   Given the ordering≺, the ordered Markov boundary of spini, denoted∂             ≺(i), is the minimal subset ofP   i such that
si is conditionally independent of the remaining past givenσ  ∂≺(i)  :

                                                              σi⊥⊥σ Pi\∂  ≺(i) |σ ∂≺(i) .                                                                  (12)

Graphically,∂≺(i) consists of those past nodesj∈P      i that are either directly adjacent toiinG, or connected toiby a
pathj→v                1→···→v  k→i, whose intermediate nodesv             1,...,vk all lie in the unsampled futureF     i.  Intuitively, only
past nodes that can influenceithrough chains passing entirely via future nodes remain relevant after marginalizing
outF   i.
   Consequently, the autoregressive conditional depends only on the ordered Markov boundary:P(σ         i|σ Pi) =P(σ   i|
σ∂≺(i)  ).  An explicit expression for the conditional is obtained by marginalizing over the future variablesF      i:
                                                                         P
                                                    P(σ  i|σ Pi) =     P    σFiP(σ  Pi,σi,σ Fi)

                                                                           σi,σ FiP(σ  Pi,σi,σ Fi).                                                      (13)

   In graphical-model language, marginalizing out a set of nodesF   i induces a new graph structure over the remaining
nodesP   i∪{i}.  Specifically, marginalization fully connects the neighbors of any marginalized node, effectively creating
“fill-edges”  across  the  boundary  separatingP         i  andF   i.   Therefore,  the  only  variables  inP  i  that  remain  directly
B    Details of hardware acceleration                                                                                                                            12

dependent ons  i after marginalizingF           i are those connected toivia paths throughF         i, or those directly adjacent toi.
This set is exactly∂    ≺(i).
  This observation has a direct algorithmic implication for autoregressive modelling and the construction of sparse
attention patterns:  when sampling or predictingσ i in the chosen ordering, it suffices to condition on (or attend to)
the  ordered  Markov  boundary∂   ≺(i).   Exploiting  this  minimal  dependency  yields  exact  autoregressive  conditionals
while enabling a principled sparse attention design that reduces computation without sacrificing correctness.


                                                   2.    Concatenated Positional Embedding

  A key feature of FlashVAN is its special positional embedding scheme designed for spin sequences.  In the origi-
nal transformer developed for natural language processing, attention captures relationships between tokens, whereas
positional embeddings explicitly encode order because the architecture itself is position-invariant.  In this context, se-
mantic dependencies play a far more dominant role than absolute positional information.  In fact, decoder-only models
trained with causal masking can implicitly encode positional information, a mechanism referred to as NoPE [59].
  However, this situation is fundamentally reversed in spin systems.  The spin configurationσdiffers greatly from
natural language data.  Each spin can only take two possible states (+1 or -1), meaning the vocabulary size is merely
2, vastly smaller than that of natural language.  More importantly, the spatial correlations between spins at different
positions encode the essential physical properties of the system.  Therefore,  we hypothesize that,  unlike in natural
language modeling, positional information is the central factor governing the representational power of transformer-
based VANs.  To validate this hypothesis, we design a concatenated positional embedding,  which unifies the token
embedding and positional embedding into a single vector.
  Letd       token denote the token embedding dimension, andd   pos the positional embedding dimension, with the overall
embedding dimensiond=d                          token +d    pos.  A spin configuration is represented as
                                                              σ= (σ     1,σ2,...,σN),                                                                    (14)
where eachσ i∈{+1,−1}indicates the spin state (up or down,d                         token = 2), andNis the number of spins.  For every
spinσ   i in the configuration, we construct the model input vector using the concatenated positional embedding:
                                                           si = Embed(σ   i)∈R  dtoken,

                                                          pi = Embed(p   i)∈R  dpos,                                                              (15)

                                                          xi = [s i ;p i ]∈R  d,
where each row corresponds to the trainable embedding vector for the positioni.  The operator [·;·] denotes vector
concatenation.
  Under this embedding scheme, we intentionally amplify positional signals in FlashVAN while down-weighting spin
embedding signals.  We also tested how our new concatenated positional embedding performs compared to the com-
monly used absolute positional embedding method.  The results reveal that our concatenated positional embedding
demonstrated the best performance on spin-system tasks.  Detailed experimental settings can be found in Supplemen-
tary Information, Section IB.


                                                  B.    Details of hardware acceleration

  Apart from the architectural innovations, another major highlight of FlashVAN lies in its training efficiency.  By
leveraging hardware-optimized CUDA kernels, FlashVAN can efficiently handle systems with 163 spins, a regime that
is practically inaccessible to vanilla VANs.
  Hardware  acceleration  is  incorporated  into  FlashVAN  in  two  main  ways.   First,  we  replace  the  standard  atten-
tion  withFlashAttention-2[44],  an  efficient  attention  kernel  optimized  for  modern  GPU  architectures,  reducing
memory overhead and improving computational efficiency.  Second, a KV cache is used during sampling to accelerate
autoregressive generation, consistent with the common practice in LLM inference.


                                                         1.    CUDA-kernel acceleration

  Efficient  kernel  implementations  are  essential  for  practical  training,  yet  are  often  underutilized  in  existing  VAN
implementations.   Modern  GPUs  are  highly  optimized  for  deep-learning  workloads,  providing  specialized  compute
B    Details of hardware acceleration                                                                                                                            13

units  such  as  Tensor  Cores  and  Tensor  Memory  Accelerators  (TMAs).   FlashVAN  is  designed  to  explicitly  take
advantage of these hardware features.
   In  transformer-based  models,  the  attention  matrix  computation  has  quadratic  complexity  with  respect  to  the
sequence lengthL.  For largeL, explicitly materializing theL×Lattention matrix is both memory- and bandwidth-
intensive.  However,  in practice,  the quantity of interest is the product Attn·V,  rather than the attention matrix
itself.  Moreover, data movement between different levels of GPU memory is often the dominant cost in large-scale
training.  Kernel designs that keep intermediate results in registers or shared memory, rather than repeatedly accessing
global memory, can therefore yield substantial speed-ups.FlashAttention-2exploits these principles by tiling the
attention computation with online softmax [60], streaming blocks of queries, keys and values through on-chip memory,
and orchestrating compute to maximize arithmetic intensity.
   By  integratingFlashAttention-2,  FlashVAN  achieves  an  approximate  36×speedup  for  the  combined  forward
and backward passes compared with a baseline PyTorch implementation.  Moreover, the performance gap widens as
the sequence length increases.  All measurements are conducted on identical hardware at a sequence length of 1024;
further details are provided in the Supplementary Information, Section IIB.

Algorithm 2KV cache sampling in FlashVAN.
 1:Input:batch sizeB, sequence lengthN, number of layersn                     ℓ
 2:Initialize token buffer sampless∈N          B×N
 3:Initialize KV caches{K             (ℓ) ,V (ℓ) }nℓℓ=1   as preallocated GPU tensors
 4:Initialize cache lengths len←0∈N        B
 5:fort= 1,Ndo
 6:    ift= 1then
 7:         x t←[0; ]                                                        ▷Start token (default:  0)
 8:    else
 9:         x t←[s      :,t−1     ]                                                    ▷previous sampled token
10:   end if
11:   h←Concatenate Positional Embedding(x           t,t)
12:   forℓ= 1,n       ℓ do
13:       h     norm←LayerNorm1     (ℓ)   (h)
14:        (q       (ℓ)t ,k (ℓ)t ,v (ℓ)t   )←LinearQKV      (ℓ)   (h  norm)
15:       o     (ℓ)t ←flash    attn  with   kvcache q(ℓ)t ,K (ℓ) ,V (ℓ) ,len,causal = True  
16:       h←h+o                    (ℓ)t                                                      ▷self-attention residual
17:       h←h+ FFN                (ℓ)  LayerNorm2(ℓ)   (h)                                       ▷feed-forward residual
18:        Append (k       (ℓ)t ,v (ℓ)t   ) to caches:  (K  (ℓ) ,V (ℓ)   )←(K        (ℓ) ,V (ℓ)   )∪(k       (ℓ)t ,v (ℓ)t   )
19:   end for
20:   len←len + 1
21:   z  t←OutputHead(h)
22:   p  t←softmax(z         t)
23:   s     :,t ∼Categorical(p            t)
24:end for
25:Map tokens to spins:σ←2·s−1
26:Output:spin configurationsσ∈{−1,+1}                            B×N




                                                                 2.    Sampling Strategy

   As  discussed  in  the  Results  section,  during  each  training  iteration,  the  time  spent  on  sampling  dominates  the
total  runtime;  thus,  accelerating  the  sampling  process  directly  translates  into  faster  overall  training.   In  a  com-
mon transformer-based VAN, generating a spin configuration of lengthNproceeds autoregressively.  At generation
stept,  the  model  computes  query,  key,  and  value  vectors  (q     t,k 0:t ,v 0:t  ).   At  the  next  step,t+1,  it  recomputes
(q t+1 ,k 0:t+1  ,v 0:t+1    ).  It is evident thatk         0:t    andv       0:t    are identical to those computed in the previous step, leading to
redundant computation that grows quadratically withN.
   To mitigate this inefficiency, FlashVAN adopts a KV cache strategy, similar to that used in LLM inference [61,62].
At each generation stept, the model only computes the new vectors (q     t,k t,v t) while reusing the cached (k  0:t−1  ,v 0:t−1      )
from previous steps.  After the attention weights are updated through the softmax operation, the new key and value
vectors  are  appended  to  the  cache,  forming  an  updated  set  (k  0:t ,v 0:t  )  for  subsequent  steps.   This  reuse  strategy
effectively removes redundant computation across generation steps, reducing the complexity of sampling fromO(N            3)
toO(N          2).  The detailed procedure is summarized in Algorithm2.  Although further optimizations are possible, the
C    Details of training neural networks                                                                                                                       14

present design demonstrates that hardware-aware caching can substantially accelerate both sampling and training,
opening new directions for efficient VAN architectures.


                                                   C.    Details of training neural networks

                                                                   1.    Training strategy

   In this section,  we describe the training strategy adopted for FlashVAN. As detailed in the Results section,  the
model is trained to approximate the Boltzmann distribution by minimizing the KL divergence in Eq. (4), which leads
to Eq. (5).  By multiplying both sides byβand differentiating, we obtain the following:
                                                                      X
                                                   β∇ θFq =∇ θ             qθ(σ) [βE(σ) + lnq       θ(σ)].                                                   (16)
                                                                       σ
Expanding the derivative gives
                                    β∇ θFq =X          ∇θqθ(σ) (βE(σ) + lnq        θ(σ)) +q    θ(σ)∇   θ lnq  θ(σ) .                                  (17)

                                                    σ
Using the identity∇ θqθ(σ) =q    θ(σ)∇   θ lnq  θ(σ) and rewriting the summation as an expectation overq    θ, we obtain

                                            β∇ θFq =E   σ∼q   θ(σ) ∇θ lnq  θ(σ) (βE(σ) + lnq        θ(σ)) .                                           (18)

Similar to the policy gradient algorithm in reinforcement learning [48], the gradient is estimated as [8]:

                                                                   MX   L(σ     (m)    )−
                                                 ∇θFq∝  1M                              L∇θ lnq  θ(σ  (m)    ),                                                 (19)
                                                                 m=1

where{σ              (m) }Mm=1    areMspin configurations sampled fromq        θ,L(σ) =βE(σ) + lnq          θ(σ), and             Lis a baseline used to
reduce the variance of the gradient estimator.  For the ground-state objective, we reparameterize the loss in terms
of the temperatureT, yielding an equivalent formL(σ) =E(σ) +Tlnq                       θ(σ) up to a constant scaling.  As annealing
proceeds andTdecreases, the entropy termTlnq           θ(σ) becomes progressively negligible, and the objective reduces to
pure energy minimization.


                                                                2.    Variational annealing

   To obtain the ground state using a variational autoregressive network, an annealing strategy is helpful to progres-
sively lower the temperature during training [34].  This gradual cooling process allows the model to transition from
learning finite-temperature Boltzmann distributions to discovering the zero-temperature configuration that minimizes
the energy.  As the temperature decreases (T↓,β↑), the entropy termTE          qθ[lnq  θ(σ)] gradually vanishes, and the
objective reduces to:

                                                              limT→0  Fq =E qθ[E(σ)]↘E                 0,

whereE            0  =  minσE(σ)  is  the  ground-state  energy.   Thus,  by  annealing  the  temperatureTduring  training,  the
objective transitions smoothly from learning finite-temperature free energy to identifying the zero-temperature ground
state.  The annealing schedule implemented in FlashVAN is described below.  As visualized in Fig.1d, the schedule
starts from an initial temperatureT              0 and gradually approaches the zero-temperature limit.  We define a sequence of
nanneal temperature points{T  k}nannealk=0     , which follow a predefined schedulef(i) over the training stepsi:
                                                  Ti =T    0,                   i≤n     warmup,
                                         f(i) =                                i−n     warmup
                                                  Ti =T    0−  T0                                ,  i>nwarmup.                                         (20)
                                                                    nanneal           neq

Here,n           warmup  denotes the number of training steps in the warm-up stage,n            eq  is the number of optimization steps
performed at each temperature point.  The total number of training steps is thereforeN                  steps =n    warmup +n    eqnanneal.
C    Details of training neural networks                                                                                                                       15

For larger systems, the temperature schedule is implemented via a non-uniform discretization of{T   k}, with logarith-
mic spacing allocating more points near the low-temperature regime, followed by a linear refinement near the final
temperature.
  For  the  3D  EA  experiments,  we  modify  this  estimator  as  described  in  Eq.  (10).   Samples  are  first  generated
autoregressively fromq    θ and then refined by a short local Monte Carlo trajectory.  The refined configurations are used
in the gradient estimate, together with the additional likelihood term weighted byw.  This procedure can be viewed
as self-distillation:  local Monte Carlo acts as a local teacher that maps the model samples toward nearby physically
relevant configurations, and the likelihood term trains FlashVAN to increase the probability of those refined samples.
This stabilizes low-temperature training while preserving the variational free-energy component of the objective.



                                                        3.    Comparison on optimizers

  FlashVAN  adopts  the  Muon  optimizer  [63],  achieving  accelerated  convergence  and  superior  accuracy  on  spin-
glass  tasks  (Supplementary  Figure  8).   While  the  conventional  Adam  optimizer  [64]  ensures  training  stability  via
exponential  moving  averages  of  first  and  second  moments,  its  isotropic  scaling  may  not  fully  exploit  the  intrinsic
geometry of transformer-based architectures.  Specifically, weight matrices in these models often exhibit a low-rank
structure,  where  parameter  updates  are  concentrated  along  a  few  principal  directions.   Although  second-order  or
natural-gradient methods [35,65,66] can theoretically address this directionality, they often rely on the estimation of
a sample covariance matrixS.  These approaches not only introduce sampling noise and numerical instability under
data-limited regimes but also impose prohibitive computational and memory overhead [67].
  Muon circumvents these limitations by explicitly orthogonalizing the momentum matrix via Newton-Schulz itera-
tions, thereby refining the geometry of matrix-valued updates.  LetM   t  denote the momentum matrix at iterationt
(initializedM                      0 = 0) andL   t(W) be the loss evaluated on the mini-batch.  The updates are

                                                        Mt =µM t−1    +∇L t Wt−1 ,
                                                         Ot = Newton-Schulz(M   t),                                                             (21)
                                                        Wt =W t−1 −η tOt,

whereµandη         t represent the momentum coefficient and the learning rate, respectively.  SinceO    t has the same shape as
Mt, it provides a structured (approximately orthogonalized) direction for updating the corresponding weight matrix
Wt.  Crucially, the Newton-Schulz iteration relies solely on high-throughput operations, such as matrix addition and
multiplication, thereby bypassing the sequential bottlenecks and numerical instability of singular value decomposition
(SVD). In this work,  we employ an augmented version of the Muon optimizer.  Beyond the core orthogonalization
step, we integrate weight decay to regularize the growth of parameter norms and implement RMS scale alignment to
ensure consistent update magnitudes across disparate layer shapes [33].  A comprehensive comparison with standard
optimizers is detailed in the Supplementary Information, Section III.
  Data availability:The authors declare that the data supporting this study are available within the paper.
  Code availability:.  A PyTorch implementation of the present algorithm can be found at the GitHub repository,
which will be publicly available upon the acceptance of the manuscript.



                                                              Acknowledgments

  We thank Lei Wang, Yuliang Jin, Luciano Hugo Miranda Filho for their helpful communication.  This work is sup-
ported by Project 12322501, 12575035 of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and 2026NSFSCZY0124
of the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province.  The computational work is supported by the Center for HPC,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.



                                                            Author contributions

  Y.T.,  P.Z.,  J.L.  had  the  original  idea  for  this  work.   L.Z.,  W.D.  and  J.L.  performed  the  study,  and  all  authors
contributed to the preparation of the manuscript.
C    Details of training neural networks                                                                                                                       16

                                                                Competing interests

   The authors declare no competing interests.


                                                              Additional information

   Supplementary  informationThe  online  version  contains  supplementary  material  available  at  [URL  will  be
inserted by publisher].
   Correspondence and requests for materialsshould be addressed to Ying Tang.
   Reprints and permission informationis available online at [URL will be inserted by publisher].





 [1]K. Binder and A. P. Young, Spin glasses:  Experimental facts, theoretical concepts, and open questions,Rev. Mod. Phys.
     58, 801 (1986).
 [2]M. M´ezard, G. Parisi, N. Sourlas, G. Toulouse, and M. Virasoro, Nature of the spin-glass phase,Phys. Rev. Lett.52, 1156
     (1984).
 [3]M.  J.  Schuetz,  J.  K.  Brubaker,  and  H.  G.  Katzgraber,  Combinatorial  optimization  with  physics-inspired  graph  neural
     networks,Nat. Mach. Intell.4, 367 (2022).
 [4]D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick, 50 years of spin glass theory,Nat. Rev. Phys.7, 528 (2025).
 [5]D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick, Solvable model of a spin-glass,Phys. Rev. Lett.35, 1792 (1975).
 [6]S. F. Edwards and P. W. Anderson, Theory of spin glasses,J. Phys. F5, 965 (1975).
 [7]K. Binder, D. W. Heermann, and K. Binder,Monte Carlo Simulation in Statistical Physics, Vol. 8 (Springer, 1992).
 [8]D. Wu, L. Wang, and P. Zhang, Solving statistical mechanics using variational autoregressive networks,Phys. Rev. Lett.
     122, 080602 (2019).
 [9]P. Mehta, M. Bukov, C.-H. Wang, A. G. Day, C. Richardson, C. K. Fisher, and D. J. Schwab, A high-bias, low-variance
     introduction to machine learning for physicists,Phys. Rep.  (2019).
[10]B. McNaughton, M. V. Miloˇsevi´c, A. Perali, and S. Pilati, Boosting monte carlo simulations of spin glasses using autore-
     gressive neural networks,Phys. Rev. E101, 053312 (2020).
[11]G.  Carleo  and  M.  Troyer,  Solving  the  quantum  many-body  problem  with  artificial  neural  networks,Science355,  602
     (2017).
[12]G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto, and L. Zdeborov´a, Machine learning
     and the physical sciences,Rev. Mod. Phys.91, 045002 (2019).
[13]M. Hibat-Allah, M. Ganahl, L. E. Hayward, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla, Recurrent neural network wave functions,
     Phys. Rev. Research2, 023358 (2020).
[14]T. Westerhout, N. Astrakhantsev, K. S. Tikhonov, M. I. Katsnelson, and A. A. Bagrov, Generalization properties of neural
     network approximations to frustrated magnet ground states,Nat. Commun.11, 1593 (2020).
[15]D. Luo, Z. Chen, J. Carrasquilla, and B. K. Clark, Autoregressive neural network for simulating open quantum systems
     via a probabilistic formulation,Phys. Rev. Lett.128, 090501 (2022).
[16]G.  Carleo,  K.  Choo,  D.  Hofmann,  J.  E.  Smith,  T.  Westerhout,  F.  Alet,  E.  J.  Davis,  S.  Efthymiou,  I.  Glasser,  S.-H.
     Lin, M. Mauri, G. Mazzola, C. B. Mendl, E. van Nieuwenburg, O. O’Reilly, H. Th´eveniaut, G. Torlai, F. Vicentini, and
     A. Wietek, Netket:  A machine learning toolkit for many-body quantum systems,SoftwareX10, 100311 (2019).
[17]D. Wu,  R. Rossi,  F. Vicentini,  N. Astrakhantsev,  F. Becca,  X. Cao,  J. Carrasquilla,  F. Ferrari,  A. Georges,  M. Hibat-
     Allah, M. Imada, A. M. L˜A¤uchli, G. Mazzola, A. Mezzacapo, A. Millis, J. R. Moreno, T. Neupert, Y. Nomura, J. Nys,
     O. Parcollet, R. Pohle, I. Romero, M. Schmid, J. M. Silvester, S. Sorella, L. F. Tocchio, L. Wang, S. R. White, A. Wietek,
     Q. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and G. Carleo, Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems,Science386, 296
     (2024).
[18]Y. Tang, J. Weng, and P. Zhang, Neural-network solutions to stochastic reaction networks,Nat. Mach. Intell.5, 376 (2023).
[19]Y. Tang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and P. Zhang, Learning nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and dynamical phase transitions,
     Nat. Commun.15, 1117 (2024).
[20]J. Weng,  X. Zhu,  J. Liu,  L. L¨u,  P. Zhang, and Y. Tang, Tracking large chemical reaction networks and rare events by
     neural networks,arXiv:2512.10309  (2025).
[21]M. Germain, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Made: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation, inProceedings
     of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by
     F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 881–889.
[22]H. Larochelle and I. Murray, The neural autoregressive distribution estimator, inProceedings  of  the  Fourteenth  Interna-
     tional  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Statistics, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 15, edited by
     G. Gordon, D. Dunson, and M. Dud˜Ak (PMLR, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2011) pp. 29–37.
[23]B.  Uria,  M.-A.  Cˆot´e,  K.  Gregor,  I.  Murray,  and  H.  Larochelle,  Neural  autoregressive  distribution  estimation,J.  Mach.
     Learn. Res.17, 7184 (2016).
C    Details of training neural networks                                                                                                                       17

[24]S. Ciarella, J. Trinquier, M. Weigt, and F. Zamponi, Machine-learning-assisted monte carlo fails at sampling computation-
     ally hard problems,Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol.  (2023).
[25]L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zamponi, Nearest-neighbors neural network architecture for efficient sampling
     of statistical physics models,Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol.6, 025029 (2025).
[26]C.  Fan,  M.  Shen,  Z.  Nussinov,  Z.  Liu,  Y.  Sun,  and  Y.-Y.  Liu,  Searching  for  spin  glass  ground  states  through  deep
     reinforcement learning,Nat. Commun.14, 725 (2023).
[27]S. Boettcher, Deep reinforced learning heuristic tested on spin-glass ground states:  The larger picture,Nat. Commun.14,
     5658 (2023).
[28]C.  Fan,  M.  Shen,  Z.  Nussinov,  Z.  Liu,  Y.  Sun,  and  Y.-Y.  Liu,  Reply  to:  Deep  reinforced  learning  heuristic  tested  on
     spin-glass ground states:  The larger picture,Nat. Commun.14, 5659 (2023).
[29]J. Yuan, H. Gao, D. Dai, J. Luo, L. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Wei, L. Wang, Z. Xiao,et  al., Native sparse attention:
     Hardware-aligned and natively trainable sparse attention,arXiv:2502.11089  (2025).
[30]A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,   L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention is All
     You Need, inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 30 (2017).
[31]T.  Dao,  D.  Y.  Fu,  S.  Ermon,  A.  Rudra,  and  C.  R´e,  FlashAttention:   Fast  and  memory-efficient  exact  attention  with
     io-awareness, inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS 2022, Vol. 35 (2022) pp. 16344–16359.
[32]J. Shah, G. Bikshandi, Y. Zhang, V. Thakkar, P. Ramani, and T. Dao, FlashAttention-3:  Fast and accurate attention with
     asynchrony and low-precision, inAdvances  in  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems, Vol. 37, edited by A. Globerson,
     L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (Curran Associates, Inc., 2024) pp. 68658–68685.
[33]J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan,et  al., Muon is scalable for llm training,
     arXiv:2502.16982  (2025).
[34]M. Hibat-Allah, E. M. Inack, R. Wiersema, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla, Variational neural annealing,Nat. Mach.
     Intell.3, 952 (2021).
[35]J. Liu, Y. Tang, and P. Zhang, Efficient optimization of variational autoregressive networks with natural gradient,Phys.
     Rev. E111, 025304 (2025).
[36]I.  Biazzo,  D.  Wu,  and  G.  Carleo,  Sparse  autoregressive  neural  networks  for  classical  spin  systems,Mach.  Learn.:  Sci.
     Technol.5, 025074 (2024).
[37]L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zamponi, Demonstrating real advantage of machine learning–enhanced monte
     carlo for combinatorial optimization,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, e2534768123 (2026)123.
[38]N. Bhattacharya, N. Thomas, R. Rao, J. Dauparas, P. K. Koo, D. Baker, Y. S. Song, and S. Ovchinnikov, Interpreting
     potts  and  transformer  protein  models  through  the  lens  of  simplified  attention,  inPacific  Symposium  on  Biocomputing
     (World Scientific, 2021) pp. 34–45.
[39]R. Rende and L. L. Viteritti, Are queries and keys always relevant?  a case study on transformer wave functions,Mach.
     Learn.:  Sci. Technol.6, 010501 (2025).
[40]M. Fr´ıas-P´erez,  M. Mari¨en,  D. P. Garc´ıa,  M. C. Ba˜nuls, and S. Iblisdir, Collective monte carlo updates through tensor
     network renormalization,SciPost Physics14, 123 (2023).
[41]T. Chen,  E. Guo,  W. Zhang,  P. Zhang, and Y. Deng, Tensor network monte carlo simulations for the two-dimensional
     random-bond ising model,Phys. Rev. B111, 094201 (2025).
[42]T. Chen, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Deng, and P. Zhang, Batchtnmc:  Efficient sampling of two-dimensional spin glasses using
     tensor network monte carlo,arXiv:2509.19006  (2025).
[43]J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, RoFormer:  Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding,
     Neurocomput.568,10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127063(2024).
[44]T. Dao, Flashattention-2:  Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning, inInternational Conference on
     Learning Representations, Vol. 2024 (2024) pp. 35549–35562.
[45]R.  Rende,  L.  L.  Viteritti,  L.  Bardone,  F.  Becca,  and  S.  Goldt,  A  simple  linear  algebra  identity  to  optimize  large-scale
     neural network quantum states,Commun. Phys.7, 260 (2024).
[46]K. Sprague and S. Czischek, Variational monte carlo with large patched transformers,Commun. Phys.7, 90 (2024).
[47]A. Van de Walle, M. Schmitt, and A. Bohrdt, Many-body dynamics with explicitly time-dependent neural quantum states,
     Mach. Learn.:  Sci. Technol.6, 045011 (2025).
[48]R. J. Williams, Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning,Mach. Learn.8,
     229 (1992).
[49]M. M´ezard, G. Parisi, and M. A. Virasoro, Spin glass theory and beyond (World Scientific, Singapore, 1986).
[50]M. Kac and J. C. Ward, A combinatorial solution of the two-dimensional ising model,Phys. Rev.88, 1332 (1952).
[51]J.  Charfreitag,  M.  J¨unger,  S.  Mallach,  and  P.  Mutzel,  McSparse:  Exact  solutions  of  sparse  maximum  cut  and  sparse
     unconstrained binary quadratic optimization problems, in2022  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Algorithm  Engineering
     and Experiments (ALENEX)(2022) pp. 54–66.
[52]P. Bia las, P. Korcyl, T. Stebel, A. Stefa´nski, and D. Zapolski, Sampling two-dimensional spin systems with transformers,
     arXiv:2604.27738  (2026).
[53]F. Rom      ˜A¡, S. Risau-Gusman, A. Ramirez-Pastor, F. Nieto, and E. Vogel, The ground state energy of the edwards-anderson
     spin glass model with a parallel tempering monte carlo algorithm,Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
     388, 2821 (2009).
[54]S.-J. Ran, E. Tirrito, C. Peng, X. Chen, L. Tagliacozzo, G. Su, and M. Lewenstein,Tensor Network Contractions:  Methods
     and Applications to Quantum Many-Body Systems(Springer Nature, 2020).
C    Details of training neural networks                                                                                                                       18

[55]T. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Deng, and P. Zhang, Tensor network markov chain monte carlo: Efficient sampling of three-dimensional
     spin glasses and beyond,arXiv:2509.23945  (2025).
[56]C. Chilin, E. Marinari, V. Mart´ın-Mayor, G. Parisi, J. J. Ruiz-Lorenzo, and D. Yllanes, On the true low-energy excitations
     of the three-dimensional spin glass,arXiv:2606.07197  (2026).
[57]F. Ritort and P. Sollich, Glassy dynamics of kinetically constrained models,Adv. Phys.52, 219 (2003).
[58]H.-J. Zhou, K-core attack, equilibrium k-core, and kinetically constrained spin system,Chin. Phys. B33, 066402 (2024).
[59]A. Kazemnejad, I. Padhi, K. Natesan Ramamurthy, P. Das, and S. Reddy, The impact of positional encoding on length gen-
     eralization in transformers, inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 36, edited by A. Oh, T. Naumann,
     A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Curran Associates, Inc., 2023) pp. 24892–24928.
[60]M. Milakov and N. Gimelshein, Online normalizer calculation for softmax,arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02867  (2018).
[61]R. Pope, S. Douglas, A. Chowdhery, J. Devlin, J. Bradbury, J. Heek, K. Xiao, S. Agrawal, and J. Dean, Efficiently scaling
     transformer inference, inProceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, Vol. 5, edited by D. Song, M. Carbin, and T. Chen
     (Curan, 2023) pp. 606–624.
[62]W.  Kwon,  Z.  Li,  S.  Zhuang,  Y.  Sheng,  L.  Zheng,  C.  H.  Yu,  J.  Gonzalez,  H.  Zhang,  and  I.  Stoica,  Efficient  memory
     management for large language model serving with pagedattention, inProceedings  of  the  29th  Symposium  on  Operating
     Systems Principles, SOSP ’23 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023) pp. 611–626.
[63]K. Jordan,  Y. Jin,  V. Boza,et  al., Muon:  An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks,https://kellerjordan.
     github.io/posts/muon/(2024).
[64]D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam:  A method for stochastic optimization,arXiv:1412.6980  (2014).
[65]S.-i. Amari, Natural gradient works efficiently in learning,Neural Comput.10, 251 (1998).
[66]J. Martens and R. Grosse, Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curvature, inProceedings of
     the  32nd  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by
     F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 2408–2417.
[67]F.  Kunstner,  P.  Hennig,  and  L.  Balles,  Limitations  of  the  empirical  fisher  approximation  for  natural  gradient  descent,
     inAdvances  in  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems,  Vol.  32,  edited  by  H.  Wallach,  H.  Larochelle,  A.  Beygelzimer,
     F. d'Alch´e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019).
Supplementary Information:  Scalable Physics-Inspired Transformers for Spin Glasses





                                                         CONTENTS

 I. Model and architecture details                                                                       2
    A. From the ordered Markov boundary to physics-inspired sparse attention                            2
    B. Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE                                           3
    C. Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation                                               4
    D. Model configurations and training settings                                                   5

II. Hardware and implementation details                                                           6
    A. Hardware and software environment                                                              6
    B. FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects                          7

III. Optimizer comparison                                                                              8
    A. Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon                                                   8
    B. Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings                              10

IV. Comparison with classical baselines                                                          11
    A. Configurations for MADE                                                                       11
    B. Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time                                                   13

    References                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                             2

  The Supplementary Information provides technical specifications, experimental protocols, and additional analyses to
support reproducibility. SectionIdescribes the model architecture, including the physics-inspired sparse attention
mechanism derived from the ordered Markov boundary, positional encoding strategies, and the self-distilled local
Monte Carlo training scheme. SectionIIpresents hardware and implementation details, with emphasis on the runtime
characteristics and scaling behavior of  FlashAttention-2 [1]. SectionIIIexamines optimization strategies and their
associated learning-rate schedules. SectionIVcompares the proposed method with classical baselines, evaluating both
predictive accuracy and computational cost.



                                       I.  MODEL AND ARCHITECTURE DETAILS

                     A.  From the ordered Markov boundary to physics-inspired sparse attention

  Based on the theoretical guarantee of autoregressive screening (main text, Section IVA1), we now map the concept
of the ordered Markov boundary ∂≺(i)to the concrete architectural design of our transformer model. Consider a
D-dimensional lattice of linear size L containing N =LD spins. When processed by a decoder-only transformer, the
D-dimensional spatial structure is flattened into a 1D sequence using an ordering≺, such as a standard raster scan
ordering. As established, predicting σi requires only the spins within ∂≺(i). Physically, this ordered Markov boundary
represents the topological frontier that separates the sampled region Pi from the unsampled region Fi. Because
interactions in the Ising Hamiltonian are local, the “fill-edges” generated by marginalizing the future spins Fi only
propagate along this physical frontier. Consequently, the boundary ∂≺(i)comprises a cross-sectional cut of the lattice.
For a 2D lattice, this cut consists of roughly L spins corresponding to the current row and the immediately preceding
row. In fact, the maximum index distance dmax is strictly bounded by: dmax = maxj∈∂   ≺(i)  (i−j    ) =O(LD−1     ). For
a 1D system, dmax = 1, for a 2D system, dmax =O(L), and for a 3D system, dmax =O(L2). Thus, all necessary
information to exactly computeP(σ                   i|σ Pi)is completely contained within a local 1D sequence window of this size.
  The standard full causal attention calculates an attention matrix Aij for all past tokens j≺i  , incurring anO(N 2)
computational overhead. While a fully connected transformer might theoretically learn that attention weights should
decay such that Aij→ 0for j < i−d     max, forcing the model to infer this structural decay is inefficient and risks
capturing spurious, unphysical long-range correlations.
  Motivated by these observations and the localization properties of the system, our physics-inspired sparse attention
explicitly incorporates the constraints into the model architecture. By applying a sliding window attention mask of
widthW≥d                    max, we enforce a strict structural sparsity:

                                                        Aij = 0 for i−j >W                                   (S1)

This theoretically grounded truncation reduces the attention complexity fromO(N 2)to O(NW ). Crucially, this
banded sparsity pattern aligns well with hardware-optimized kernels, such as FlashAttention, enabling the massive



















Figure 1:Runtime comparison between physics-inspired sparse attention and full causal attention.(a)
Autoregressive sampling runtime and (b) log-probability evaluation and backward pass runtime as a function of
sequence length, for sparse attention and full causal attention.
B  Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE                                                 3




































Figure 2:Effect of sparse attention on the overlap distribution  p(q).Comparison between sparse attention
and full causal attention in FlashVAN for four disorder instances at temperature T  = 0.31. Both variants accurately
reproduce the multi-peaked structure of p(q)and show close agreement with the Kac-Ward solution [ 2] and parallel
tempering (PT).


acceleration required to scale physical simulations to previously inaccessible lattice sizes. This alignment enables both
computational efficiency and physical fidelity, which we validate through numerical experiments.
  We first examine the computational scaling on the 1D Ising model. For long sequences (L> 4096), full attention
becomes computationally prohibitive, whereas sparse attention scales efficiently with the window size (Supplementary
Fig.1). We then evaluate the physical accuracy on the 2D Edwards–Anderson (EA) model via the overlap distribution
p(q). As shown in Supplementary Fig.2, sparse attention closely matches full causal attention and reference methods,
accurately reproducing the multi-peaked structure ofp(q)across different disorder instances.


                                B.  Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE

  To evaluate positional encodings, we compare concatenated positional embeddings (concatenated PE), which
FlashVAN uses by default, with additive positional embeddings (Add PE) in three controlled experiments; the
experimental traces appear in Supplementary Figures3–5. All comparisons keep the model architecture and training
hyperparameters identical; only the form of the positional encoding or the token/position embedding split is varied.
When the total embedding dimension dmodel is fixed, the allocation between token and positional components strongly
affects performance at large system sizes, as illustrated in Supplementary Fig.3. For small systems (for example
N = 30,  dmodel = 32), free-energy convergence is largely insensitive to the position-to-token ratio; by contrast, for large
systems (for example N = 256,   dmodel = 256), configurations that allocate excessive capacity to token embeddings
exhibit degraded convergence and higher final free energy. Given the binary nature of the spin variables, a minimal
token embedding (dtoken = 2) suffices in practice (in the absence of patching) and frees capacity for positional encoding
as system size grows.
B  Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE                                                 4

  In addition to allocation effects, concatenated PE yields more stable training trajectories and modestly faster
convergence than Add PE, with this advantage most pronounced in low-temperature regimes where Add PE can
exhibit oscillatory behavior (Supplementary Fig.4). Evaluation of learned distributions via the overlap    p(q)on hard
2D EA instances shows that, when training converges, both schemes recover the correct multi-modal structure and
match reference methods (Kac-Ward formula [2], PT [3]), as shown in Supplementary Fig.5.
  Based on these empirical findings, we recommend allocating minimal dimensionality to token embeddings for binary
spins (e.g.d         token = 2) and using concatenated PE for improved stability and scalability to large system sizes.
































Figure 3:Effect of the positional-to-token embedding ratio on free energy convergence.The total em-
bedding dimension dmodel is held constant, and Ratio is defined as dpos/dtoken. (a) Free-energy convergence trajec-
tories for the SK model at system size N = 30under different Ratio values. (b) Corresponding results for  N = 256.
Columns correspond to different random seeds.




                                          C.  Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation

  To further clarify the origin of FlashVAN’s strong performance in the 3D EA model, we perform an ablation
study of the overlap distribution p(q)at four representative temperatures, T  = 1.92,0  .77,0  .29, and0    .10. The gray
histogram denotes the equilibrium reference distribution obtained from PT. The three columns compare different
training strategies within FlashVAN: LMC with self-distillation, LMC without self-distillation, and a baseline variant
in which both LMC updates and self-distillation are removed.
  As shown in Fig.6, the closest agreement with the PT reference is obtained only when both LMC and self-distillation
are included. In this case, FlashVAN reproduces the overlap distribution consistently across the full temperature range,
including the low-temperature regime where the distribution becomes highly structured and difficult to learn. When
self-distillation is removed while retaining LMC updates, visible deviations from the PT benchmark already appear,
especially at lower temperatures. When both LMC and self-distillation are removed, the discrepancy becomes even
more pronounced, and the learned distribution fails to correctly capture the overall structure of the PT reference.
  These results show that the performance reported in the main text relies crucially on the improved training strategy
rather than on the model architecture alone. The two ingredients play complementary roles. The short LMC procedure
refines the generated configurations before evaluating the loss and therefore provides a more physically informed
C  Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation                                                               5





























Figure 4:Comparison of two absolute positional-embedding (PE) schemes.Green and red denote Add PE
and concatenated PE, respectively; dashed lines indicate reference energies. (a) Free-energy convergence trajectories
for the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick (SK) model at N = 20under a fixed random seed, shown for inverse temperatures
β  =  1, 2.5, 4, 5. (b) Free-energy convergence for the SK model at N  =  256at   β  =  0.5. (c) Energy convergence
during ground-state search in the 2D EA model.


training signal. In this sense, LMC serves as a strong teacher that guides the model toward physically relevant
configurations. At the same time, the additional self-distillation term stabilizes training by encouraging the model to
assign higher probability to these refined samples, thereby counterbalancing the tendency of the original objective to
collapse onto a limited set of modes, particularly at low temperatures. Together, these two ingredients constitute a
self-distillation-based training strategy that is essential for stabilizing learning and for enabling FlashVAN to recover
the correct overlap distribution in the challenging low-temperature regime.
  For all results shown in Fig.6, we use the same model architecture, with    nlayers  = 2, dtoken  = 64,  dpos  = 192,
nheads  = 2, and patch size(2   , 2, 2). Each model is trained for a total of 7000 steps. At the highest temperature
T  = 1.92, the model is trained directly at the target temperature without annealing. For the lower temperatures
T  = 0.77,0  .29, and0    .10, we use an annealing schedule consisting of 5000 warmup steps at  T  = 1.92, followed by 2000
training steps while annealing to the target temperature.



                                         D.  Model configurations and training settings

  This section lists the model definitions used in our experiments, the default hyperparameter settings, and the
methods for measuring parameter counts and training time. It also provides details on the concrete configurations and
training durations for different system sizes (Supplementary Tables1–5).
  Symbols used throughout are defined in Supplementary Table1. Default FlashVAN settings are listed in Supple-
mentary Table2; typical values include    nlayers = 2, nheads = 4, dtoken = 2, the Muon optimizer [ 4] with η = 10−3 , a
cosine-decay learning-rate schedule with 300 warmup steps, and the annealing protocol reported in the table. For the
EA model, the input spin configuration on an LD lattice is partitioned into non-overlapping patches of size2      D. Each
patch is mapped to a token, reducing the input sequence length from LD to( L/2)D, thereby improving computational
efficiency.
  To extend the approach to larger 2D EA systems (L≥    48), we adopt an extended configuration to improve scalability
while maintaining a comparable parameter count. Specifically, a2 × 2patching scheme is used, increasing the token
dimension from dtoken = 2to16, and enabling a more efficient representation of local spin configurations. In addition,
D  Model configurations and training settings                                                            6




































Figure 5:Comparison of Add and concatenated positional embeddings via the overlap distribution
p(q).Curves show  p(q)for four disorder instances at temperature T  =  0.31. Kac-Ward formula and PT are in-
cluded as reference distributions.


the loss function incorporates both a reverse-KL-driven exploration term and a likelihood-based regularization term, as
defined in Eq. (10). To further stabilize training at larger scales, we employ a two-stage procedure. An initial warm-up
phase follows the standard FlashVAN setting, after which an annealing phase is performed using FlashVAN with 2D
rotary positional encoding (RoPE) [5]. This design enables scaling to system sizes up to L = 60without a substantial
increase in the number of trainable parameters.
  Wall-clock timings in Supplementary Tables3–5follow a consistent protocol. The per-step time reports the average
elapsed time for a single training step (forward pass, backward pass, and parameter update), while the total training
time is measured from the start of training until completion on the GPU, excluding initialization and model-loading
time. All timing experiments were repeated under the hardware environment specified in Supplementary SectionIIA.





                                 II.  HARDWARE AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS


                                            A.  Hardware and software environment

  All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU (80 GB). To ensure reproducibility, we maintain a
consistent software stack featuring Python 3.11, PyTorch 2.8.0, and FlashAttention v2. Mixed precision is strategically
employed: attention kernels operate in FP16, whereas embeddings, feed-forward layers, and parameter updates remain
in FP32 to strike a balance between throughput and numerical stability. Detailed environment specifications, including
exact package builds and random seeds, are provided in our repository.
A  Hardware and software environment                                                                  7



































Figure 6:Ablation study for the overlap distribution  p(q)in the 3D EA model at L  =  10.The gray
histogram denotes the PT reference. From left to right: FlashVAN trained with both LMC updates and self-
distillation, with LMC only, and with neither LMC nor self-distillation. Rows are at temperatures T  = 1.92,0  .77,
0.29, and0.10.




                     B.  FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects


   FlashAttention substantially mitigates the runtime and memory overheads of transformer-based sampling for
long sequences. We benchmark our FlashVAN against a baseline transformer-based VAN (transformer-VAN) that
utilizes PyTorch’s naive attention implementation, which recomputes the full attention matrix at each generation
step. In contrast, FlashVAN integrates FlashAttention kernels with a KV cache for efficient autoregressive sampling.
Per-step runtimes are averaged over 500 training steps, with peak memory consumption recorded during the process
(Supplementary Fig.7).
   The computational complexity of a single full self-attention evaluation isO(N 2d), where N is the sequence length and
d =dmodel is the hidden dimension. If autoregressive sampling naively recomputes all attention scores at each of the N
generation steps, the end-to-end sampling cost becomes O(N 3d). FlashAttention does not alter these asymptotic costs
for a single full attention evaluation, but its fused CUDA kernels and careful exploitation of on-chip memory greatly
reduce memory traffic and constant factors, yielding substantial wall-clock speedups for the attention computation
itself.
   More importantly for sampling, FlashVAN combines FlashAttention with a KV cache so that key/value tensors
computed for past positions are reused rather than recomputed. In practice, this reduces the sampling complexity from
O(N 3d)to O(N 2d). The empirical traces in Supplementary Fig.7a show that FlashVAN achieves substantially lower
per-step runtime than the transformer-VAN baseline as sequence length increases, with differences growing rapidly
for longer sequences. Peak memory traces in Supplementary Fig.7b likewise show that FlashVAN uses less device
memory than the naive implementation, although both implementations display steeply increasing memory demands
with sequence length.
B  FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects                                   8

Table 1: Definition of symbols used for model architecture and training hyperparameters.

                               Symbol Description

                               nlayers   Number of layers
                               nheads   Number of attention heads
                               dtoken   Token embedding dimension
                               dpos    Positional embedding dimension
                               dmodel  Total per-token embedding dimension,d                     model =d    token +d    pos
                               nwarmup Number of warm-up (high-temperature) training steps
                               nanneal  Number of temperature points during the annealing phase
                               neq     Number of training steps per linear annealing temperature level
                               Nbatch  Batch size
                               η      Learning rate
                               Np     Number of trainable parameters


Table 2: General model and training settings for FlashVAN experiments. The annealing strategy is applied when
searching for ground-state energies.

                               Category Parameter            Default value

                                          Architecture           FlashVAN
                               Model      nlayers                              2
                                          nheads                              4
                                          dtoken                              2

                                          Optimizer             Muon
                                          Learning rate     η= 10       −3
                               Training   Learning rate scheduler Cosine decay, 300 warmup steps
                                          Annealing strategy   n  warmup = 1200, n     anneal = 500, n       eq = 5
                                          Nbatch                             1024
                                          Nsteps                              4000



                                                  III.  OPTIMIZER COMPARISON

                                          A.  Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon

   We conduct a systematic comparison of three optimizer classes: first-order Adam [6], first-order Muon, and a
quasi-second-order improved natural-gradient (NG) method [7] on two tasks: free-energy estimation for the Sherrington–
Kirkpatrick (SK) model withN = 30and ground-state energy search for the 2D EA model. For the SK model (  N = 30;
93,642 trainable parameters), a logarithmically spaced grid search identifies the optimal learning rates as10 −3  for
Adam,10   −3  for Muon, and10  −2  for the NG method. Exact free energies across a range of inverse temperatures β are
computed by enumeration and used as reference. As shown in Supplementary Fig.8a, all three optimizers achieve
consistently low relative free-energy errors (below10 −3 ), with Muon producing the smallest relative error at most
temperature points.
   We extend the ground-state search procedure across multiple model scales for the 2D EA task. For intermediate-scale
configurations (373,680 trainable parameters), the optimal learning rates are identified as10 −3  for Adam,10   −2  for
Muon, and10  −1  for the NG method. In Supplementary Fig.8b, dashed lines represent reference ground-state energies
sourced from a public online server [8]. At the larger scale (1,513,478 trainable parameters), the optimal learning rate
shifts to10 −3  for both Adam and Muon, as illustrated in Supplementary Fig.8c.
A  Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon                                                            9

Table 3: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the SK model at different system sizesN.

                             Parameter                 N= 30N= 64N= 128N= 256

                             dpos                              62       62       126       254
                             nheads                            2        2        4         4
                             Wall-clock time per training step0.020 s      0.036 s      0.090 s       0.300 s
                             Total wall-clock training time1.320 min  2.387 min  5.980 min  19.847 min


Table 4: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the 2D EA model for different system sizes
L, withn            layers = 2for all cases.

                   Parameter                 L= 8  L= 16 L= 24  L= 32L= 48L= 60

                   dpos                              62       126       254       318     144    176
                   dtoken                             2        2         2         2       16     16
                   nheads                            2        4         4         4        4      4
                   nwarmup                         2000     2000      3000      3200    4500   4500
                   nanneal                           100      120       220       240     2000   2000
                   neq                               5        5         5         5        0      0
                   Nbatch                          1024     1024      1024      1024    2048   2048
                   Wall-clock time per training step0.014 s      0.049 s       0.224 s        0.382 s     1.273 s  2.596 s
                   Total wall-clock training time0.581 min  2.182 min  11.766 min  28.337 min  3.000 h  4.830 h



  Natural-gradient methods approximate second-order information and can accelerate convergence, but naive imple-
mentations require inverting an Np×N    p matrix, with cubic time scaling in the number of parameters. The variant of
NG used in this work circumvents this bottleneck by approximating the parameter-space inverse with an inversion
carried out at the batch level (i.e., an Nbatch×N    batch matrix), thereby shifting the computational dependence from
model dimensionality to batch size. This approach requires computing per-sample gradients and assembling batchwise
matrices at each optimization step, which increases memory usage. Even so, as system size grows, the storage and
construction of per-sample gradients cause rapidly increasing memory demands, even for fixed Nbatch. This remains a
practical limitation of the method.
  Taken together, Adam provides a computationally inexpensive and reliable baseline; the improved NG offers faster


Table 5: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the 3D EA model for different system sizes
L.

                           Parameter                L= 4L= 6L= 8L= 10L= 14L= 16

                           dpos                            30    126    124    96    192    192
                           dtoken                           2      2      4     32     64     64
                           nheads                           2      2      2      2      2      2
                           nlayers                           3      3      3      2      2      2
                           nwarmup                        2000   2000  10000  5000   5000   5000
                           nanneal                         100    100    300   2000   2000   2100
                           neq                             5      5      5      0      0      0
                           Nbatch                         1024   1024   2048   2048   2048   2048
                           Wall-clock time per training step0.028 s  0.052 s  0.132 s  0.179 s  0.819 s  1.290 s
B  Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings                                        10



















Figure 7:Performance comparison between the transformer-based VAN (purple) and FlashVAN
(green).(a) Mean per-step runtime for the combined forward and backward pass, averaged over 500 steps. (b)
Peak GPU memory usage during training.

















Figure 8:Effect of optimizer choice on training convergence.Dashed lines indicate reference energies. (a)
Relative free energy error|f−f       exact|/|f     exact| for the SK model (N = 30) as a function of inverse temperature β;
the inset shows the standard deviation σ(f). Green, purple and pink curves denote the Muon, NG and Adam opti-
mizers, respectively. (b) Energy convergence per site for the 2D EA model at L = 16. (c) Free-energy convergence
for the SK model at N = 256. Under identical training and model configurations, NG could not be run at this scale
due to GPU memory limitations.


convergence and higher final accuracy but is constrained by increased memory and computational overhead; and Muon
delivers the best trade-off in our experiments, achieving faster convergence and lower relative errors.


                         B.  Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings

   For a fair comparison across optimizers, we conduct a systematic, logarithmically spaced grid search over initial
learning rates, typically spanning10     −4  to10 −1 . Final choices are made by inspecting task-specific convergence and
numerical stability (optimal values are reported above in SectionIIIA).
   We adopt a two-stage learning-rate schedule consisting of an initial linear warmup followed by cosine annealing to
enhancebothtrainingstabilityandfinalperformance. Specifically, thelearningrateisrampedlinearlyfrom10   −5  to10 −3
over the first 300 steps using LinearLR, after which CosineAnnealingLR is applied with Tmax = 2700and    ηmin = 10−5 .
If training proceeds beyond Tmax, the learning rate is maintained at ηmin. In fixed-temperature SK training, this
warmup-plus-cosine schedule produces a small but consistent improvement in final accuracy (Supplementary Fig.9a).
In that panel, dashed lines correspond to runs employing warmup plus cosine decay, while solid lines denote fixed-
learning-rate runs, illustrating that the two-stage schedule aids in obtaining more accurate free-energy estimates in
this regime.
B  Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings                                        11
















Figure 9:Impact of learning rate scheduler on training convergence and accuracy.All panels compare a
fixed learning rate of1 × 10−3  with a cosine learning rate scheduler using a warm-up phase of 300 steps. (a) Free-
energy convergence for the SK model, showing training trajectories for N  =  64, 128, 256approaching the exact
thermodynamic-limit value N→∞  . (b) Energy convergence per site for the 2D EA model at L = 32. (c) Residual
energy per site as a function of system sizeL, comparing PBC and OBC.
                                                               perfectly aligns



  However, in the ground-state energy search task for the 2D EA model (Supplementary Figs.9b and9c), the same
warmup-plus-cosine learning-rate schedule instead leads to degraded accuracy. We hypothesize that this effect is related
to changes in temperature (inverse temperature β) during training: under an annealing protocol, each temperature
decrease alters the target distribution, making the target distribution both sharper and shifted in location. The
optimizer therefore needs to adjust parameters rapidly after each temperature change in order to track the new peaks.
As the learning rate decreases monotonically during training, the optimizer may become overly conservative, making
step sizes too small at critical moments and hindering fast convergence to new peaks. This issue is particularly
pronounced in our setup, where we train for only five steps at each temperature and thus leave very little time for the
optimizer to adapt. As a result, a globally monotone-decreasing learning-rate schedule often becomes too small at
crucial moments, preventing the model from tracking the rapid changes in the target distribution and thereby reducing
ground-state search accuracy.
  Based on these observations, we adopt the following practical recommendations for experiments.  For fixed-
temperature convergence tasks (for example, free-energy estimation of the SK model at fixed β), we recommend using
a warmup-plus-cosine learning-rate schedule to improve final accuracy. By contrast, for ground-state search tasks that
involve rapid temperature changes, we recommend caution when using a globally monotone-decreasing learning-rate
schedule. Instead, consider more conservative or piecewise strategies.





                                  IV.  COMPARISON WITH CLASSICAL BASELINES


                                                   A.  Configurations for MADE


  The Masked Autoencoder for Distribution Estimator (MADE) [9] utilizes a purely feedforward architecture featuring
masked fully connected layers to enforce an autoregressive property. Specifically, for any node j in layer l and node i
in the subsequent layer l + 1, the connection weight W lij is constrained when i≥j  , ensuring that each output depends
only on previously generated variables. Owing to its architectural simplicity, the computational cost of MADE scales
linearly with system size L, whereas its parameter count grows quadratically with network width and depth, as shown
in Supplementary Table6. To enable training of larger systems on a single accelerator, we introduce patching in several
configurations by partitioning spins into local blocks and modeling each block, thereby reducing the parameter count by
roughly an order of magnitude in many settings. However, MADE’s reliance on localized representations and the lack
of a global information-aggregation mechanism limit its ability to capture hierarchical structures in high-dimensional
systems. Consequently, gains in parameter efficiency do not necessarily yield preserved representational capacity or
accuracy.
A  Configurations for MADE                                                                          12

Table 6: Trainable parameter statistics of MADE.

                        System size Net depth Net width Parameters (w/ patch) Parameters (w/o patch)

                                          1         1             4096                 4096
                                          2         1             4368                 8256
                        L = 8             2         4            17472                33024
                                          2         8            34944                66048
                                          2        16            69888                132096
                                          3         4            25728                164352

                                          1         1           1048576              1048576
                                          2         4           4457472              8392704
                        L = 32            2        16          17829888             33570816
                                          2        32          35659776                 –
                                          3         4           6555648                 –


Table 7: Trainable parameter statistics of FlashVAN.

                             System sized       pos nheads Parameters (w/ patch) Parameters (w/o patch)

                                            14    1           6544                 6950
                             L = 8          30    1          24336                25286
                                            62    4          93712                95750
                                            94    8          208144               211270

                                           126   1          397872                  –
                             L = 32        254   4         1517104                 –
                                           318   16         2347056                 –





















Figure 10:Benchmarking the accuracy of MADE and FlashVAN on the 2D EA model.Panels (a) and
(b) show the residual energy per site as a function of the number of trainable parameters. Each data point is aver-
aged over five disorder instances. (a) System sizeL= 8. (b) System sizeL= 32.
A  Configurations for MADE                                                                          13




















Figure 11:Comparison of wall-clock training efficiency between MADE and FlashVAN.Panels (a) and
(b) show the wall-clock time per training step as a function of the number of trainable parameters for system sizes
L= 8andL= 32, respectively. Each data point is averaged over 1,000 training steps.


                                       B.  Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time

   For the 2D EA ground-state estimation task, we evaluate both convergence accuracy and computational cost for
MADE and FlashVAN. Supplementary Fig.10presents the relative error between estimated and exact energies,
averaged over five disorder instances, as a function of the number of trainable parameters. At L = 8, FlashVAN
attains an extremely low relative error (≈ 10−6 ), retaining high precision even under patching configurations. In
contrast, MADE achieves comparable accuracy only in its unpatched form; once patched, its error deteriorates to
10−1 , indicating that input compression degrades its ability to preserve key information. This limitation becomes more
pronounced at L = 32: despite scaling to tens of millions of parameters, MADE fails to reach low-error solutions and
is consistently outperformed by FlashVAN in both patched and unpatched regimes.
   Supplementary Fig.11reports wall-clock metrics. Due to attention overhead, FlashVAN exhibits a slightly higher
per-step time than MADE at equal parameter scales (the difference is on the order of0 .03seconds per step). Crucially,
FlashVAN’s patching strategy reduces total parameter counts and overall training time while maintaining accuracy,
delivering a better time-accuracy trade-off in medium-to-large problems such as L  =  32.  In summary, MADE
offers attractive theoretical scaling but is limited by representational constraints in large-scale settings; FlashVAN’s
combination of expressive attention and efficient compression yields superior practical scalability and final performance.
B  Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time                                                          14





[1] T. Dao, Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning, inInternational Conference on
    Learning Representations, Vol. 2024 (2024) pp. 35549–35562.
[2]M. Kac and J. C. Ward, A combinatorial solution of the two-dimensional ising model,Phys. Rev.88, 1332 (1952).
[3]E. Marinari and G. Parisi, Simulated tempering: a new monte carlo scheme,Europhys. Lett.19, 451 (1992).
[4] J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan,et al., Muon is scalable for llm training,
    arXiv:2502.16982 (2025).
[5] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding,
    Neurocomput.568,10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127063(2024).
[6]D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[7] J. Liu, Y. Tang, and P. Zhang, Efficient optimization of variational autoregressive networks with natural gradient,Phys. Rev.
    E111, 025304 (2025).
[8] McSparse, University of Bonn, Format descriptions — McSparse, http://mcsparse.uni-bonn.de/mcgroundstate/formats
    .html(2026), accessed 15 Jan 2026.
[9] M. Germain, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Made: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation, inProceedings
   of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by
    F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 881–889.