jQMC: A JAX-basedab initioquantum Monte Carlo package designed for
GPU-accelerated computing

        Kousuke Nakano1,a)  and Michele Casula2

        1)Center for Basic Research on Materials, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS),

        1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan

        2)Institut de Min´eralogie, de Physique des Mat´eriaux et de Cosmochimie (IMPMC),

        Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS UMR 7590, IRD UMR 206, MNHN, 4 Place Jussieu,
        75252 Paris, France

        (Dated: 16 July 2026)









































                                                     1
         We present jQMC, a Python-based computational package forab initioQuantum Monte
         Carlo  (QMC)  simulations,  designed  for  modern  GPU-accelerated  computing  environ-
         ments. jQMC implements two well-established QMC algorithms: Variational Monte Carlo
         (VMC) and the lattice-regularized variant of Diffusion Monte Carlo (LRDMC). The em-
         ployed  wave  function  is  a  Jastrow  factor  combined  with  the  antisymmetrized  geminal
         power with spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings, which contains the single Slater deter-
         minant as its special lowest-rank case.  The wave function can be initialized from exter-
         nal  Hartree-Fock/Density  Functional  Theory  calculations  through  the  TREX-IO  library
         (a common wave-function format across electronic-structure packages) and optimized by
         stochastic reconfiguration and linear-method energy minimization.  One of the prominent
         features of jQMC is its use of JAX, which enables automatic differentiation for wave func-
         tion optimization and atomic force calculations, and allows the main QMC algorithms to
         be Just-In-Time (JIT) compiled and portable across CPU and GPU. jQMC is vectorized
         over walkers at the top level of the QMC algorithms, providing efficient intra-GPU (CPU)
         vectorization.  The multi-GPU (CPU) parallelization is also supported through MPI and
         JAX  sharding.   To  assess  the  practical  performance  of  this  implementation,  we  bench-
         marked jQMC performance on NVIDIA GPUs (A100 and H100) and analyzed CUDA
         kernels.  For the test cases analyzed here, with system sizes up to 160 electrons, the cur-
         rent version of jQMC is faster than TurboRVB, a Fortran90 code implementing the same
         algorithms and wave functions, once jQMC is run on GPUs.  In terms of wall-time, the
         gain can reach an order of magnitude for VMC, while it is more moderate for LRDMC.
         Furthermore, to demonstrate the applications of jQMC, we focus on an ongoing debate
         in the community, namely the accuracy of QMC quantities compared with highly accu-
         rate Quantum Chemistry calculations such as coupled-cluster theory with single, double,
         and perturbative triple excitations [CCSD(T)]. We studied the accuracy of atomic forces
         computed by VMC and LRDMC for ethanol and malonaldehyde. We found that LRDMC
         forces achieve∼1.5 kcal/mol/Å accuracy in the mean absolute error (MAE) with respect
         to all-electron CCSD(T) forces for ethanol, while LRDMC and CCSD(T) forces are quite
         different (∼5 kcal/mol/Å in MAE) for malonaldehyde.







a)Electronic mail: kousuke 1123@icloud.com


                                                        2
I.    INTRODUCTION


   Solving  the  many-body  Schr¨odinger  equation  remains  a  central  challenge  in  computational
chemistry and physics.   For nearly a century,  researchers have been developing many theoreti-
cal and numerical techniques to address this problem.  Among these, Density Functional Theory
(DFT) is one of the most widely adopted approaches. DFT maps the many-electron problem into
a system of non-interacting electrons in an effective potential, called eXchange-Correlation (XC)
functional1.  Although DFT is formally exact, its practical application depends on the XC func-
tional, and its exact form remains unknown. Progress in systematically improving this functional
has been elusive2. As a result, widely used approximations often fail in situations involving strong
correlation effects or weak van der Waals interactions.

   An alternative strategy for addressing the complexity of the many-electron Schr¨odinger equa-
tion is offered byab initioQuantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods                         3,4.  Unlike conventional deter-
ministic approaches, QMC leverages stochastic sampling (i.e., Monte Carlo) to evaluate expecta-
tion values, thereby bypassing some of the limitations of deterministic methods.  The theoretical
foundation of QMC dates back to the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) in the 1940s5  and
fixed-node Diffusion Monte Carlo (FN-DMC) in the 1980s          6,7,  which have since become indis-
pensable across diverse scientific communities. QMC shows a favorable scaling with system size,
albeit with a larger prefactor than in mean-field approaches. This prefactor, however, is mitigated
by  the  nature  of  MCMC,  which  makes  QMC  suited  for  modern  high-performance  computing
(HPC) architectures.  The algorithmic structure allows for near-perfect weak scaling across thou-
sands of cores, positioning QMC as a promising method for next-generation simulations of both
molecular and extended systems.

   To dates, several groups have implementedab initioQMC codes such as Amolqc, CASINO                                            8,9,
CHAMP-EU10, CHAMP-US11, CMQMC, PyQMC12, QMC=Chem                 13, QMCPACK14,15, QMeCha16,
QWalk17, and TurboRVB18,19 (named alphabetically).  It is also worth highlighting recent efforts
for standardizing data and functionalities required among QMC packages.  For instance, TREX-
IO20 is a library designed to standardize the wave function format among different QMC packages.
QMCkl21 provides common kernels for core QMC algorithms. They represent valuable efforts in
the QMC community to consolidate their development efforts.

   The recent shift of HPC facilities toward GPU-dominated infrastructures presents significant

                                                          3
challenges for scientific computing and programming22. Legacy codebases cannot fully exploit the
computational power of GPU hardware without a comprehensive refactoring of the code because
the suitable designs are often very different between them. Nearly all of the top-tier systems, such
as those ranked in the TOP500 list23,24, are equipped with CPU-GPU hybrid architectures, with
very few exceptions such as Fugaku25.  There are several approaches to make codebases portable
to GPU machines, such as using native programming languages (e.g., CUDA), directive-based pro-
gramming models (e.g., OpenACC26), or OpenMP offload, and exploiting GPU-optimized libraries
such as NVIDIA’s cuBLAS and cuSOLVER. A related and increasingly promising approach in-
volves harnessing libraries, such as Kokkos27,28, TensorFlow29, PyTorch30, and JAX31, which are
designed inherently with GPU execution. These frameworks offer a powerful abstraction for high-
performance computing and are now being explored forab initioQMC applications. Notable ex-
amples ofab initioQMC codes built on these modern frameworks include FermiNet                  32, PauliNet33,
QMCTorch34, and JaQMC35 which have demonstrated the potential of combining QMC with ma-
chine learning and neural network architectures.

   Our developingab initioQMC code, named jQMC, relies on one of the libraries, JAX                               31. JAX
has  several  features  helping  with  making  code  fast  and  portable  across  different  architectures.
jQMC implements two ground-state QMC algorithms: variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and DMC3
in its lattice regularized version.  In VMC, the ground state is obtained by minimizing the total
energy (or variance) with a parametrized many-body wave function ansatz. DMC is an imaginary-
time projection technique4 that filters out the ground-state wave function from a given trial wave
function, typically combined with the so-calledfixed-node(FN) approximation. The nodal surface
is constructed by a mean-field calculation, such as Hartree-Fock (HF) or DFT, or by an accurate
variational optimization, and is usually kept frozen during the projection.

   In  particular,  the  jQMC  package  introduces  several  distinguishing  features  that  collectively
enhance its capability and flexibility forab initioquantum Monte Carlo simulations:  ( i ) wave
function ansatz:  jQMC supports the Jastrow Antisymmetrized Geminal Power (JAGP)36, a res-
onating valence bond (RVB)-type wave function.  JAGP contains the single Slater determinant as
a special case.  ( ii ) wave function optimization:  The code implements the stochastic reconfig-
uration (SR) method37 and the linear method (LM), robust and efficient optimization algorithms
that enable simultaneous optimization of both wave function amplitudes and nodal surfaces. ( iii )
Projection method:  To perform DMC calculations with enhanced numerical control, jQMC in-

                                                         4
cludes an implementation of the lattice regularized DMC (LRDMC) method38,  which provides
improved stability over traditional DMC algorithms.  ( iv ) Force evaluation:  By leveraging algo-
rithmic differentiation with the JAX framework, jQMC enables efficient implementation of energy
derivatives, such as atomic forces39, directly from the many-body wave function.  ( v ) Software
architecture:  Developed in Python, the codebase emphasizes ease of use for end-users and mod-
ular extensibility for developers.  This makes it well-suited for both production simulations and
the rapid prototyping of new QMC algorithms.   ( vi ) Hardware acceleration:  Through just-in-
time (JIT) compilation and vectorized execution (e.g., via jit and vmap) provided by JAX, jQMC
achieves high computational performance across diverse hardware backends, including CPUs and
GPUs.   ( vii )  Parallel  scalability:  Built-in  MPI  support  (mpi4py40)  and  the  native  JAX  shard-
ing mechanism allow jQMC to scale efficiently on modern HPC platforms, enabling large-scale
many-body simulations.  These components together position jQMC as a modern and versatile
platform for both conducting accurate quantum Monte Carlo simulations and developing novel
methodologies within the QMC framework.


   This paper is organized as follows:  Sec. II briefly explains the QMC algorithms implemented
in  jQMC,  MCMC,  VMC,  and  LRDMC.  Sec.  III  describes  the  RVB-family  of  wave  functions
combined with the Jastrow factor; Sec. IV focuses on the implementation of the bare Coulomb
interactions and effective core potentials.   Sec. V details how energy derivatives are computed
(e.g., atomic forces) in jQMC; Sec. VI reviews the wave function optimization techniques cur-
rently implemented in jQMC; Sec. VII summarizes the implementation of jQMC and its typical
QMC workflow; Sec. VIII describes the mixed-precision support implemented in jQMC. Sec. IX
explains  the  vectorization  strategy  employed  in  jQMC  and  its  benchmark  results  measured  on
Miyabi (University of Tokyo) supercomputer;  Sec. X reports an analysis of the CUDA kernels
in  jQMC  using  NVIDIA Nsight  Systems  and  NVIDIA  Nsight  Compute,  and  study  the  bottle-
necks of the current implementation.  Sec. XI reports wall-time benchmarks of jQMC on CPU
and GPU machines, and compares them with the TurboRVB QMC code, implementing the same
algorithms and wave functions; Sec. XII describes the parallelization strategy employed in jQMC
and reports weak scaling results of jQMC, measured on Leonardo (CINECA) and Miyabi (Uni-
versity of Tokyo) supercomputers; Sec. XIII reports a validation of jQMC by comparing the total
energies of methane, water, and methane-water dimer, and its binding energy with other QMC
codes;  Sec. XIV demonstrates MCMC and DMC atomic-force calculations for the ethanol and

                                                        5
malonaldehyde molecules, and compares them with all-electron coupled-cluster theory with sin-
gle, double, and perturbative triple excitations [CCSD(T)].


II.    METHODS

    jQMC implements two established Quantum Monte Carlo methods:  Variational Monte Carlo
(VMC) and Lattice Regularized Diffusion Monte Carlo (LRDMC). We summarize these methods
in  this  Section.   For  further  details,  the  reader  is  referred  to  more  comprehensive  reviews  and
textbooks on QMC3,4.  We notice that throughout this paper the formalism is presented assuming
a real many-body wave functionΨ(x)∈R, which is also the only case currently supported by the
jQMC implementation (v.0.2.2).  Extending the formalism to a complex wave functionΨ(x)∈C
is left for future developments.


A.    Variational Monte Carlo


    Given theab initioHamiltonian                ˆH, the expectation value of the energy can be computed by
MCMC as:
                               DΨ|     ˆH|Ψ E   R  dxΨ      2 (x)·   ˆHΨ    (x)/Ψ  (x)  Z
                  EMCMC =         ⟨Ψ|Ψ ⟩    =              R  dxΨ      2 (x)             =  dxe      L (x)π (x),                 (1)


for a given wave function (WF)Ψ, wherex=                         (r1σ1,r 2σ2,...r  NσN) represents theNelectron
coordinates and their spins, and

                                  eL (x)≡   ˆHΨ    (x)Ψ (x)      andπ      (x)≡      Ψ2 (x)R  dx ′Ψ2 (x′),


are the local energy and the probability distribution, respectively.  MCMC allows one to evaluate
the multidimensional integration in Eq. 1 stochastically by generating a set of configurations{xi}
according to the distributionπ         (x) and by averaging the accumulated local energiese          L (xi):

                                                                            MX
                                        EMCMC =⟨eL (x)⟩π(x)≈  1M                eL (xi),                                           (2)
                                                                           i=1

The total energy and the mean of other local observablesO            L are always associated with a statistical
error of pVar[O       L(x  i)]/    ˜M, where Var[O            L(x  i)] is the variance of the sampled observables, and   ˜Mis
the sampling sizeMdivided by the autocorrelation time. Then, assumingΨis parametrized with

                                                              6
a set of variational parametersα≡               α1,α2,···,α   p , the corresponding variational energy reads:

                                                             Z
                                         EMCMC (α) =             dxe      L (x,α  )π (x,α  ) ⩾E    0,                                        (3)

where, according to thevariational theorem,E                MCMC provides an upper bound to the exact ground-
state energy (E  0). This framework is called VMC.

    One of the key implementations of VMC is the MCMC evaluation of the Hamiltonian expec-
tation value and the update of the parameters of the trial WF anstazΨ               T,  to get the best varia-
tional representation of the ground state according to the variational principle.  The possible WF
parametrizations available in jQMC are discussed later. The MCMC implemented in jQMC relies
on the generalized Metropolis algorithm (Metropolis–Hastings algorithm41,42). The acceptance of
a proposed move (A(x→x     ′)) reads:
                                                                  "                                 #
                                        A(x→x    ′)=min             1,   Ψ2(x ′)Ψ2(x) · T(x ′→x)T(x→x    ′),                                      (4)

wherex={···,r                        l,···}andx   ′ ={···,r  ′l,···}differ by a single-electron position.  The WF ratios
during the MCMC electron position update are efficiently computed via the fast-update algorithm,
described in Subsec. III E. jQMC, first, detects the nearest neighbor nucleusIof the target electron
lto compute the valueσ            prop(r  l) defined as:

                                      σprop(r  l)=            1                       I(l) |r l−R    I(l) |
                                                       Z2I(l) |r l−R    I(l) |· 1+Z       21+|r        l−R    I(l) | ,                                    (5)

then a single electron move is proposed:

                                                       x→x  ′ :r′l,γ  =r    l,γ  +η    l                                                        (6)

whereγis a Cartesian label (x,y,z), which is chosen randomly,η                                l is a Gaussian random number
with a mean of 0 and varianceσ                 prop(r  l)∆t, where∆tis an input hyperparameter.  The transition
probability is defined as:

                                                                                    "                         #
                               T(x→x    ′)=                1p                        − |r′l−r    l|2                                       (7)
                                                       2π(σ        prop(r  l)∆t)        2 exp2(σ     prop(r  l)∆t)        2

to satisfy the detailed-balance condition. Thus, its ratio becomes:
                                       exp"                                                          !#
                T(x ′→x)             σprop(r  l)
                T(x→x    ′) =        σprop(r ′             −|r     l−r ′l|2             12(σ     prop(r ′2(σ     prop(r  l)∆t)        2.            (8)
                                               l)                                       l)∆t)        2−            1

                                                                    7
Following this transition probability, we repeatedly perform accept/reject steps to generate Monte
Carlo  samples  and  evaluate  Eq.  2.   Eqs.  5  and  7  automatically  modulate  the  amplitude  of  the
MCMC step, by reaching a higher sampling efficiency according to the distribution of the elec-
tronic clouds centered around each nucleus.

    In the MCMC, probability distributions different fromπ              (x) can also be employed. This is called
the reweighting technique, or importance sampling.  More specifically, one can use an arbitrary
probability distribution functionπ     ′ (x) = Ψ2G (x)/R  dxΨ      2G (x), and estimate the expectation value
of a local observableO       (x) by:
                                                                           PM′
                               ¯OMCMC =⟨O (x′)W (x′)⟩π′(x′)                   i=1   O (x′i)W (x′i)PM′
                                                 ⟨W (x′)⟩π′(x′)  ≈                 i=1 W (x′i)  ,                              (9)

whereW           (x) = (Ψ (x)/Ψ   G (x))2, and the pointsx    ′i are distributed according toπ ′. The reweighting
technique is essential to compute atomic forces with finite variance,  as discussed in Sec. V B.
jQMC implements the so-called Attaccalite and Sorella (AS) reweighting scheme43 to avoid the
divergence  of  derivatives  in  the  vicinity  of  the  nodal  surface.   In  the  AS  scheme,  the  MCMC
sampling is driven by a modified guiding functionΨ                    G (x) defined by

                                                  ΨG (x) =  RεASAS (x)
                                                                RAS (x) Ψ (x).                                                   (10)
RAS(x) is defined as                                         sAS          
                                                                   X    G−1 2−θ   R
                                               RAS (x) =                       i,j                                              (11)
                                                                    i,j
whereGis the so-called pairing matrix used for the anti-symmetric part of the many-body wave
function, described later (see Sec. III B), and the scaling factors            AS is defined as:
                                                     minX               X           ,                                     (12)
                                      sAS =min           i       |G i j|2,minj       |G i j|2
                                                              j                   i
which ensures that both spin-up and spin-down electrons are treated on equal footing when ap-
proaching  the  nodal  surface,  andθ         R  =3/8  is  an  empirically  chosen  value.   Finally,  with  the
hyperparameterε                                   AS,R εASAS (x) is defined as:

                                               RεASAS (x) =max   [RAS (x),εAS]                                                (13)

By using the new probability, an observable with singular points in the vicinity of the nodal surface
can be evaluatedwith finite varianceas:

                                            ⟨W (x) O (x)⟩ΠG(x)/⟨W (x)⟩ΠG(x),                                            (14)

                                                                8
where theW      (x) is the modified weight:
                                                                                 RAS (x)           !2
                                W (x) = (Ψ (x)/Ψ   G (x))2≡              max [RAS (x),εAS]            .                              (15)

The value ofε     AS should be chosen manually in jQMC such that the average reweighting factor
⟨W (x)⟩≃0.8, which is an empirically optimal setting.


B.    Lattice regularized Monte Carlo

1.    Formalism of Lattice regularized diffusion Monte Carlo (LRDMC)

    Lattice regularized diffusion Monte Carlo (LRDMC)        38 is a method built to filter out the ground
state WF|Υ0⟩ from a given guidance WF|ΨT⟩.  This method is based on Green’s function Monte
Carlo (GFMC)44–46, and thus, it is sometimes called “power method”. In the GFMC formalism, the
ground-state WF can be obtained by iteratively applying  λ−     ˆH M to a given trial wave function:
                             |Υ0⟩∝lim          λ−     ˆH M|ΨT⟩

                                       M→∞                  a0|Υ0⟩ +                             ,
                                                                          X      λ−E       n!M                                    (16)
                                   =limM→∞   (λ−E       0)M                      λ−E       0  an|Υn⟩
                                                                           n,0
whereλis a large positive number,E                   n isn-th eigenvalue of        ˆH, anda              n is the coefficient for the
n-th eigenvectors (Υ     n) (i.e. |ΨT⟩ = P
                                                   n  an|Υn⟩).  The above projection filters out the ground state
WFΥ         0 from a given guidance WF|ΨT⟩ unless the trial WF is orthogonal to the ground state (i.e.,
a0≡⟨Ψ  T|Υ 0⟩,0) and|λ−E                       n|/|λ−E            0|≥1.

    For fermions (electrons), LRDMC is always associated with the fixed-node (FN) approxima-
tion4 because the Green’s function it not always positive for fermions.  This is referred to as the
sign problem. Therefore, in LRDMC, the Hamiltonian is modified by setting to zero the “wrong”
sign terms and summing them up into the spin-flip termV           sf (x) =   P
                                                                                           x′:s x′,x>0 Hx′,x ΨT (x′)/Ψ   T (x). This
defines an effective FN Hamiltonian       ˆH FN, which reads as:
                                            
                                              Hx,x   +V    SF (x)   forx  ′ =x,
                                 H FNx′,x  =  Hx′,x                   forx  ′ ,x,s        x′,x <0,                                (17)

                                              0                         forx  ′ ,x,s        x′,x >0,

wheres               x′,x  = ΨT (x)Hx′,x ΨT (x′) (i.e,s         x′,x >0 indicates that thex→x     ′ crosses the nodal surface
of the guiding function, or simply contributes to the Green’s functionλ−                  ˆHwith the “wrong”

                                                                 9
sign). The fixed-node Green’s function with the guiding function is then:
                              GFN                             ΨT (x′)
                                 x′,x  =  λδx′,x−H FNx′,x     ΨT (x)  =λδ    x′,x− ΨT (x′)ΨT (x)H FNx′,x                              (18)

prevents walkers from crossing the nodal surface.

    In LRDMC, the original continuous Hamiltonian is discretized with electron hopping with step
sizea.  The corresponding Hamiltonian           ˆH a satisfies   ˆH a→   ˆHfora→0.  In other words, the
kinetic and potential parts are approximated by a discretized form,   ˆH a≡  ˆKa + ˆVa. The discretized
kinetic term is computed via the finite-difference Laplacian∇                                              2a acting on a functionf               (xi,y i,z i) as
                ∇2a,i   f (xi,y i,z i) =  1  f (xi +a   )−f    (xi) +  f (xi−a   )−f    (xi)	↔y      i↔z      i.           (19)
                                        a2

More specifically, the discretized kinetic operator  ˆKa≡−1                       P
                                                                                2    i∇2i,a   acts on|x⟩as:


                                                   NeX                                  6N   eX
                                 ˆKa|x⟩≡−   12         ∇2a,i |x⟩=      3N   ea2 |x⟩−      12a   2|x  j⟩,                                  (20)

                                                  i=1                                   j=1
leading to

                                      ˆKax′,x ΨT (x′)                         ΨT (x′)
                                            ΨT (x)  =  3N   ea2 δx′,x−   12a   2ΨT (x)δadx′,x,                                       (21)
whereδ               adx′,x  =1 only ifx  ′ is adjacent tox, otherwise 0. Here, the point is that one should consider
only6N             e  x′  adjacent  tox,  making  the  GFMC  approach  applicable  to  the  continuumab  initio
Hamiltonian.  The 6N   e wave function ratios (Ψ  T (x′)/Ψ   T (x)) are computed in practice using the
fast update method, described in Subsec. III E, which is critically important for a fast calculation
of LRDMC. Once the kinetic term is discretized, the potential term  ˆVa is defined in such a way that
the local energy of   ˆH a computed on the trial WF coincides with the local energy of the continuous
Hamiltonian   ˆH.  In practice     ˆVa is divided into local and non-local terms,  ˆVa≡  ˆValoc +  ˆVnl, where
only the local term depends on the discretized mesha. The non-local potential operator            ˆVnl exists
only in the calculations with effective core potentials (ECPs). The details of the non-local potential
operator are described in Sec. IV.


2.    Implementation of LRDMC algorithms

    Since several papers have already described the details of the LRDMC implementation4,18,38,47–49,
we do not repeat them here.  jQMC implements two LRDMC algorithms:  the original (conven-
tional) LRDMC scheme38 and the recently developed load-balanced scheme49. In the conventional

                                                                10
algorithm, for a given projection timeτ, the electrons are moved a number of times corresponding
to the application of the projector exp(−τ         ˆH), and branching (reconfiguration) is then performed.
Because  this  number  is  determined  stochastically,  the  number  of  electron  moves  varies  from
walker to walker. As a result, in large-scale parallel calculations, load imbalance develops among
walkers, which degrades weak scaling49. To remove this problem, we recently proposed an alterna-
tive algorithm in which all walkers perform the same number of projection steps, and demonstrated
that this substantially improves weak scaling49. Both algorithms are implemented in jQMC.

    Here,  we  focus  on  one  implementation  aspect  that  has  received  less  attention  in  the  litera-
ture, namely the branching (reconfiguration) step4, especially its MPI implementation involving
inter-node communication.  In LRDMC, regardless of whether the conventional or load-balanced
algorithm is used, branching (reconfiguration)4 is carried out as follows.  EveryN        proj projections,
the code performs a branching step:

  (1)New walkers are selected from the previous population with probability proportional to their
        weights before branching:
                                                          pα,n   =    wα,nP
                                                                     β wβ,n .                                                     (22)
  (2)The weights of all new walkers are reset to the average weight of the previous population:
                                                                     X
                                             wα,n+1      =¯w      n≡   1Nwwβ,n   ∀α.                                   (23)
                                                                      β

In the multi-walker formalism,  the walker state therefore carries an additional walker indexα,
namely (x α,n ,w α,n  ). The selection of new configurations is implemented using an efficient reconfig-
uration scheme in which the surviving walkers are chosen fromN            w correlatedrandom numbers               4:

                                        Zα = ξ+α−1Nw  ,    α=1,...,N            w,                                          (24)

whereξis a uniform random number in [0,1). These numbers are compared with the cumulative
normalized weights to determine the new walker population. In our calculations, the survival rate
is typically around 90%, and most walkers survive unchanged after each branching step.  There-
fore, when walker replication and deletion are communicated across MPI ranks, all-to-all commu-
nication is unnecessary.  Instead, point-to-point communication is sufficient, and this is essential
for achieving good weak scaling. It is also important to perform communications simultaneously
with the other computations associated with reconfiguration, that is, to use asynchronous commu-
nication so that data transfer does not become a bottleneck.

                                                            11
C.    Error analysis


    To estimate the mean and variance of an observable   ˆOfrom a Monte Carlo simulation, one
accumulates its local values along the MCMC samples. Statistical efficiency is gained by running
multipleindependentMCMC chains in parallel.  Leti∈{1,...,M}, whereMis the chain length,
be the MCMC step index in a chain, andn∈{1,...,N}the index for an independent chain;X                                       i,n   is
the electron configuration at thei-th step of then-th chain, andO                            i,n ≡  ˆO(X      i,n  ) are the accumulated
local values. The autocorrelation of MCMC samples within a chain causes the naive independent
and identically distributed (iid) variance estimator to underestimate the true variance of the sample
mean, leading to underestimation of error bars.  To mitigate this problem, one usually uses two
techniques, reblocking and jackknife resampling4.

    Letbbe the block (bin) size andM                    b  =⌊M/b⌋the resulting number of binned samples per
chain.  One defines the binned samplesO                    j,n   withj∈{1,...,M                   b}asO        j,n   =(1/b)       Pi∈B  j Oi,n  , where
B j ={(j−1)b+1,...,jb}is the index set of MCMC steps belonging to thej-th block. When the
block sizebexceeds the autocorrelation time, the binned samples become effectively independent,
so naive iid-based variance estimators recover the correct standard error of the mean.  We notice
that samples from different chains are already mutually independent,  so blocking is performed
only along the in-chain directioniand never across the chain directionn.

    When the statistical estimator is a nonlinear function of the Monte Carlo samples, such as a ratio
estimator like the DMC/LRDMC mixed average, resampling techniques are required to estimate
its uncertainty accurately.  jQMC employs the so-called jackknife method to estimate the mean
and variance of the accumulated observables.  First, one flattens the binned samples{O                      j,n}into a
single sequence{O                        l}NJl=1    withN           J =M    b·N, and defines them-th leave-one-out jackknife sample as
         P
            l,m   Ol
OJm =    NJ−1     form∈{1,...,N                  J}. Then, the mean and variance are computed:


                                                                        NJX
                                                     µ=µ       J =   1NJ    OJm                                                        (25)
                                                                       m=1
and
                                                                              NJX  OJm−µ    J 2.                                  (26)
                                    σ2 =(N      J−1)(σ           J)2 =  NJ−1NJ
                                                                             m=1
    The jackknife (with reblocking) can also be applied to estimate the mean and variance of the
accumulatedweightedobservables. This is needed for MCMC with the reweighting technique or

                                                               12
                                                                           P
                                                                              l wlOl
for LRDMC. The weighted average is defined as   ¯O=                          P           lrunning over all MCMC
                                                                               l wl  , withP           P

                                                                                      l,m   wlOl          l wlOl−w    mOm
samples.  Them-th leave-one-out jackknife sample isO                  Jm  =          P                    P
                                                                                        l,m   wl    =        l wl−w    m     .  If
Iβ  denotes the set of MCMC step indices belonging to blockβ,  the leave-one-block-out jack-PP

                                       l<I  β wlOl         l wlOl− Pl∈I β wlOl
knife sample is thenO          Jβ =   P                    P
                                         l<I  β wl   =       l wl− Pl∈I β wl    .  Then, the mean and variance are
computed in the same way for theO       Jm quantities as described by Eqs. 25 and 26, respectively.



III.    WAVE FUNCTIONS


    jQMC employs a many-body wavefunction ansatzΨcomposed of the Jastrow factor and the
antisymmetric (AS) part:

                                                    Ψ =exp(J)×Φ                    AS,                                                       (27)

where exp(J) is symmetric under electron exchange, whileΦ                        AS is antisymmetric. jQMC currently
offers three choices ofΦ            AS: ( i ) the Antisymmetrized Geminal Power (AGP), (ii) the AGP with a
constrained number of molecular orbitals (AGPn), and (iii) the single Slater determinant.  In this
Section, we will describe the functional form of the Jastrow factor (sec. III A), the AGP (sec. III B),
the AGPn (sec. III C), the SD (sec. III D), their fast-update implementations (sec. III E), and the
basis set and atomic orbitals used in the Jastrow and AS parts (sec. III F).



A.    Jastrow factor


    The Jastrow factor, exp(J), is required to include electronic correlation and satisfy Kato’s cusp
conditions50.  In jQMC, the Jastrow term is written as the sum of one-body, two-body, and three-
or four-body contributions:J=J                       1 +J    2 +J    3/4   .  The one-body and two-body terms play a role
in satisfying the electron-ion and electron-electron cusp conditions, respectively.  The three- and
four-body terms account for additional electron correlation. The one-body Jastrow factorJ            1 is the
sum of two parts, the homogeneous part for the electron-ion cusp:


                                                   NeX  NaX  −(2Z   I)3/4   u (2Z     I)1/4 |ri−R    I|  ,                          (28)
                           Jh1 (r1,...,r  N) =
                                                   i=1  I=1

                                                             13
and the inhomogeneous part:

                                                                      NeX   NaX X               ,                                    (29)
                                         Jinh1   (r1,...,r  N) =                        LI,l χI,l  (ri)
                                                                      i=1  I=1      l
wherer               i are the electron positions,R                       I are the atomic positions with their atomic numberZ                  I,lruns
over atomic orbitalsχ                  I,l   centered on the atomI,{L                  I,l}are variational parameters,  andu        (r) is a
simple bounded function. In jQMC, two functional forms are available foru: the exponential form
(default option),                                                           1−e  −rb   ei  ,                                                 (30)
                                                     uexp (r) =    12b   ei

and the Pad´e form,
                                                      uPad´e (r) =  r2 (1+b       ei r)−1 ,                                                  (31)

both depending on a single variational parameterb                        ei.   Both forms satisfy the electron-ion cusp
condition and are bounded forr→∞.

    The two-body Jastrow factor is defined as:
                                                                        X              ri−r    j ,                                          (32)
                                              J2 (r1,...,r  N) =              vσi,σ j
                                                                         i<j

wherev      σi,σ j is another simple bounded function. In jQMC, two functional forms are implemented:
the Pad´e form (default),                                         =  ri,j  1+b       eeri,j −1 ,                                               (33)
                                                   vPad´e  ri,j        2

and the exponential form,                                       =    1       1−e  −b   ee ri,j   ,                                              (34)
                                                   vexp  ri,j       2b   ee
wherer               i,j   = ri−r    j, andb         ee is the variational parameter.  In principle,v         σi,σ j  depends on spin, if

both like-spin and unlike-spin cusp conditions are fulfilled.  In jQMC, we have implemented so
far only the spin-independent version, fulfilling the electron-electron cusp conditions for opposite
spins.

    The three/four-body Jastrow factor reads:
                                                                 X     XX                           ,                                (35)
                                     J3/4   (r1,...,r  N) =
                                                                  i<j     l     l′   Ml,l ′χl(r  i)χ  l′(r   j)

where the indiceslandl       ′ indicate different orbitals and{M                   l,l ′}are variational parameters.χare
Gaussian-type atomic orbitals (GTOs), described later.

                                                                      14
B.    Antisymmetrized Geminal Power (AGP)


    jQMC implements the antisymmetrized geminal power (AGP) ansatz for the fermionic anti-
symmetric part of the trial wave function.  The AGP ansatz was first applied toab initioquantum
Monte Carlo calculations by Casula and Sorella36, and has since been adopted in several QMC
codes.  For simplicity, we first consider a system with an even numberNof electrons.  The AGP
wave function is written as an antisymmetrized product of two-electron geminalg,

                                 ΦAS(1,...,N)=A        g(1,2)g(3,4)···g(N−1,N)                       ,                              (36)

wherei≡(r                      i,σi) denotes the spatial and spin coordinates of electroni.  The antisymmetrization
operator is defined as                                               X
                                                        A=      1N!        ϵP ˆP,                                                        (37)
                                                                    P∈S       N
whereS                N is the permutation group ofNelements,        ˆPis the operator associated with the permutation
P, andϵ            P is the sign. LetGbe theN×Nmatrix whose elements are

                                                            Gi j =g(i,j).                                                             (38)

Because of fermionic antisymmetry, the geminal satisfies

                                             g(i,j)=−g(j,i),        G                                  i j =−G        ji,                                            (39)

and henceGis skew-symmetric. In this general spin-coordinate representation, the AGP amplitude
is therefore proportional to the Pfaffian ofG.  The overall proportionality factor is irrelevant for
variational Monte Carlo because the wave function is used up to normalization.  In the current
implementation, jQMC supports only opposite-spin pairings.  Although the full geminalg(i,j) is
defined in the spin-coordinate space, only the spin up–spin down block is evaluated explicitly in
the opposite-spin implementation.  With the electrons ordered such that all spin-up are followed
by all spin-down electrons, the full skew-symmetric geminal matrix has the block form
                                                                   ,                                                          (40)
                                                         G=         0   F
                                                                  −F    T   0

where
                                                          Fi j =f(r  ↑i,r↓j).                                                           (41)

                                                                 15
The spin down–spin up block is therefore fixed by antisymmetry and does not need to be computed
independently.  ForN ↑e  =N ↓e , the Pfaffian ofGis proportional to detF, and the irrelevant overall
sign is absorbed in the normalization convention.  Thus, jQMC evaluates only the determinant of
the spin up–spin down pairing matrixF:

                                                         ΦAS(x ↑,x↓)=detF,                                                       (42)

wherex    ↑ =(r  ↑1,...,r↑N↑) andx  ↓ =(r  ↓1,...,r↓N↓), with the matrixFdefined in Eq. 41.  The spatial
pairing function is expanded on a chosen one-particle basis as
                                                                X
                                                f(r ↑i,r↓j)=          Λ↑↓lmψ↑l (r ↑i )ψ ↓m(r ↓j),                                             (43)
                                                                  lm
whereΛ    ↑↓ is the geminal coefficient matrix in the chosen orbital basis. The orbitalsψ        ↑l  andψ  ↓m can
be either atomic or molecular.  The spin character of the pair is especially transparent when the
spatial orbitals are spin independent,

                                                       ψ↑l (r)=ψ   ↓l (r)≡ψ          l(r).                                                     (44)

In this case, the opposite-spin geminal can be written as

                                g(i,j)=f(r                    i,r  j)χ ↑(σ  i)χ ↓(σ   j)−f(r          j,r i)χ ↓(σ  i)χ ↑(σ   j).                            (45)

Introducing the symmetric and skew-symmetric parts of the spatial pairing function,
                                              fS (r  i,r  j)=   1 h f(r    i,r  j)+f(r          j,r i)i,                                           (46)
                                                               2  h f(r    i,r  j)−f(r          j,r i)i,                                           (47)
                                              fA(r  i,r  j)=   12

the geminal becomes

                                  g(i,j)=f                S (r  i,r  j)hχ↑(σ  i)χ ↓(σ   j)−χ  ↓(σ  i)χ ↑(σ   j)i

                                              +f    A(r  i,r  j)hχ↑(σ  i)χ ↓(σ   j)+χ  ↓(σ  i)χ ↑(σ   j)i.                              (48)

Thus,  the  symmetric  part  of  the  spatial  pairing  function  is  associated  with  a  spin-singlet  pair,
whereas the skew-symmetric part is associated with theM       S  =0 component of a spin-triplet pair.
Equivalently, when the same spin-independent orbital basis is used for both spins, the decomposi-
tion is controlled by
                 Λ↑↓ = ΛS + ΛA,       Λ S  =  1             hΛ↑↓ +(Λ  ↑↓)Ti,       Λ  A =  1           hΛ↑↓−(Λ  ↑↓)Ti.           (49)
                                                         2                                          2

                                                                    16
A symmetricΛ       ↑↓ therefore gives a singlet AGP component, while a skew-symmetricΛ        ↑↓ gives the
MS  =0 triplet AGP component. A general matrixΛ     ↑↓ contains both components. jQMC preserves
a given symmetry of the geminal matrix during the WF optimization.

    The AGP ansatz can also be generalized to spin-polarized systems. Without loss of generality,
we can assumeN     ↑e >N ↓e and the system containsN     ↓e opposite-spin pairs withk=N     ↑e−N ↓e unpaired
spin-up electrons. In this case, the determinant form is obtained by concatenating the spin up–spin
down pairing matrix withkunpaired orbitals:

                                                         ΦAS =det    ˜F,                                                            (50)

where
                                                        ˜F=  hF↑↓  U↑i.                                                          (51)

Here,F    ↑↓  is anN  ↑e×N ↓e  matrix describing opposite-spin pairings,  andU  ↑  is anN  ↑e×kmatrix
describing the unpaired orbitals. Explicitly,
                                                 X
                                        F↑↓i j  =     Λ↑↓lmψ↑l (r ↑i )ψ ↓m(r ↓j),                                                         (52)
                                                  lm
                                                 X
                                        U↑ia =        Λ↑laψ↑l (r ↑i ),        a=1,...,k.                                        (53)
                                                   l
The resulting matrix  ˜Fis square, with dimensionN        ↑e×N ↑e , and its determinant gives the antisym-
metric part of the wave function for the spin-polarized system.

    We now describe the matrix form used in the implementation.  LetΨ  ↑ andΨ  ↓ be the orbital-
value matrices,
                                            Ψ↑li =ψ ↑l (r ↑i ),       Ψ ↓m j =ψ ↓m(r ↓j).                                             (54)

For an atomic orbital (AO) basis of sizeN         ao, the dimensions of these matrices are (N  ao,N↑e ) and
(N  ao,N↓e ), respectively. The paired block is assembled as a matrix–matrix product,

                                                     F↑↓ =(Ψ  ↑)TΛ↑↓Ψ↓,                                                       (55)

whereΛ    ↑↓ has dimension (N  ao,N ao). The unpaired block is similarly written as

                                                        U↑ =(Ψ  ↑)TΛ↑,                                                          (56)

whereΛ    ↑ has dimension (N  ao,k). Therefore,

                                              ˜F=  h(Ψ ↑)TΛ↑↓Ψ↓  (Ψ ↑)TΛ↑i.                                              (57)

                                                              17
For convenience, the variational parameters may be stored as the concatenated matrix

                                                        ˜Λ = hΛ↑↓  Λ↑i,                                                          (58)

whose dimension is (M,M+k). The firstMcolumns define the opposite-spin pairing block, while
the remainingkcolumns define the unpaired orbitals.

    The same formalism applies whether the orbital basis is chosen to be AOs or molecular orbitals
(MOs).  LetΨ   σ denote the AO-value matrix andΦ    σ the MO-value matrix for spinσ.  We use the
convention
                                               Φ↑ =C ↑Ψ↑,       Φ↓ =C ↓Ψ↓,                                               (59)

whereC    ↑  andC  ↓  are the MO coefficient matrices,  whose dimensions are (N    ↑mo, N  ao) and (N ↓mo,
Nao), respectively. In spin-polarized calculations, the MO coefficients may differ between the two
spin sectors.  IfΛ ↑↓M  andΛ  ↑M are the geminal and unpaired-orbital coefficient matrices in the MO
representation, respectively, the corresponding AO representation is

                                                     Λ↑↓A  =(C  ↑)TΛ↑↓MC↓,                                                       (60)
                                                      Λ↑A =(C  ↑)TΛ↑M.                                                            (61)

With these definitions, the concatenated pairing matrix is invariant under the AO–MO transforma-
tion:
                                             ˜FAO = h(Ψ ↑)TΛ↑↓                        i,                                            (62)
                                                                 A Ψ↓  (Ψ ↑)TΛ↑A
                                             ˜FMO = h(Φ ↑)TΛ↑↓                         i,                                            (63)
                                                                 MΦ↓  (Φ ↑)TΛ↑M
                                             ˜FAO =  ˜FMO.                                                                             (64)

Thus, the AGP wave functions expanded in AOs and MOs are evaluated by the same matrix oper-
ations in jQMC.


C.    AGP with constrained number of molecular orbital (AGPn)

    If one expands the AGP pairing function with molecular orbitals, and neglects the non-diagonal
terms of the pairing matrix or diagonalizes the pairing function to express it as a function of AGP
natural orbitals, the resultant pairing function reads:

                                      ˜FMO(x ↑,x↓)=[(Φ   ↑)TΛ↑,↓M,diag  Φ↓|(Φ ↑)TΛ↑M],                                    (65)

                                                               18
whereΛ    ↑,↓M,diag    is the diagonal matrix (i.e., the non-diagonal terms are set to zero, neglecting cou-
plings between different MO indices). This is what we call the AGPn ansatz.


D.    Single Slater determinant (SD)

    The AGP ansatz is reduced to the Slater Determinant if one restrictsM                   mo =N ↑e or, equivalently,
if the rank of theΛ  ↑,↓   matrix is equal toN ↓e , withN   ↑e−N ↓e  independent MOs. In this limit, we can
neglect the non-diagonal elements ofΛ ↑,↓   andΛ  ↑, i.e.,λ  ↑,↓i,j   =δ    i,j   (dim.:N    ↓e,N↓e ) andλ  ↑l,k   =δ    l,k+N  ↓e
(dim:N   ↑e,N↑e−N ↓e ). A typical starting point of a VMC calculation from HF/DFT is the SD anstaz
with randomized (or zero) Jastrow factor parameters.


E.    Fast update of wave function

    jQMC employs a single-electron move algorithm in MCMC, where only one electron position
is updated in each proposed MCMC step. The same single-electron update is also used in LRDMC,
as the algorithm requires.  Furthermore, both MCMC and LRDMC require evaluating the wave
function at specific spatial grid points for the non-local ECP term and for the discretized kinetic-
energy operator (LRDMC only).  These evaluations involve moving only one electron at the time
from the original electron configuration.  In such cases, one does not need to evaluate the wave
function with all electron coordinates from scratch, but one needs just to compute its variation
through the single-electron move.  In this situation, one should exploit the so-called fast-update
technique to drastically save the computational cost for both the Jastrow factor and determinant
parts.  More specifically, MCMC or LRDMC requires the evaluation of the wave function ratio
Ψ(x  ′)/Ψ(x).  The ratio is decomposed into the determinant partD(x        ′)/D(x) ande                       J(x ′)/e   J(x)    , and
computed separately.

    The Jastrow ratio is computed ase     J(x ′)/e   J(x) ≡e   ∆J  , where∆J=J(x        ′)−J(x).  Most contribu-
tions toJcancel exactly since only a single electron has been moved.  As already described in
Sec. III A, the Jastrow factor is made of three different terms.  Each of them requires a different
implementation for fast updates.

    For the determinant ratio,  let   ˜Fold  be the spatial pairing matrix [the same   ˜Fas in Eq. (51)]
before a proposed move and  ˜Fnew  the matrix after updating electronl.  A single-electron move
modifies only one row or one column of  ˜F:  a spin-up move updates rowl, whereas a spin-down

                                                           19
move updates columnl. Therefore, the new matrix can always be written as a rank-1 update,

                                                        ˜Fnew =  ˜Fold +u    lvTl,                                                       (66)

with                                           el, [  ˜Fnew

                                                         l,: −  ˜Foldl,:   ]T ,   spin-up move,
                                (u  l,v l)=       ˜Fnew               ,        spin-down move,                                     (67)

                                                   :,l −  ˜Fold:,l , e  l
wheree               l is thel-th Cartesian basis vector. The Slater determinant is treated in the same way, since
the single-determinant ansatz is a special case of AGP. Using the matrix determinant lemma,
                           det[ ˜Fnew]=det[     ˜Fold +u    lvT                                  det[ ˜Fold],                       (68)
                                                                l ]=   1+v       Tl ( ˜Fold)−1  ul

and thus the determinant ratio is

                                           ρdet≡  det[ ˜Fnew]det[ ˜Fold]  =1+v           Tl ( ˜Fold)−1  ul.                                          (69)

Thus, the acceptance ratio can be evaluated without recomputing det[ ˜Fnew] from scratch. After an
accepted move, the inverse matrix is updated using the Sherman-Morrison formula,
            ( ˜Fnew)−1   =(    ˜Fold +u    lvT                                    1+v       T             −1   vT
                                           l )−1   =(    ˜Fold)−1 −(    ˜Fold)−1  ul      l ( ˜Fold)−1  ul      l ( ˜Fold)−1 .      (70)

The  cost  of  this  standard  procedure  is  dominated  by  matrix-vector  operations.   To  reduce  this
overhead, McDaniel et al.51 proposed the delayed-update scheme, but this is not yet implemented
in jQMC.


F.    Atomic orbitals for the pairing function and the Jastrow factor


    One of the most common choices for atomic orbitals is atom-centered Gaussian-type orbitals,
denoted as GTOs. A GTO is composed of the radial and angular parts. There are two conventions
for the angular part:  One is the solid harmonics, and the other is the polynomial functions in the
Cartesian basis. jQMC implements both of them.


1.    Gaussian-Type Atomic orbitals with Solid-harmonics basis functions

    Primitive atomic orbitals (ψ  l,m,I    (r)) with the (regular) solid harmonic basis functions are given
in the following Gaussian form:

                                               ψl,m,I    (r)=N           solidl,m,I RI(r)S       l,m,I    (r),                                              (71)

                                                                 20
which can be evaluated using Cartesian coordinates (i.e.,x,y,z) because there is no singular point,
where the radial part and solid harmonics are defined as:

                                                                  RI(r)=e   −Z   I·|R   I−r|      2,                                                        (72)

and                                                             r
                                              Sl,m,I    (r)=         2l+1
            vt                                                          4π  ·|R I−r|      l·Yl,m  (θ  I,ϕI),                                    (73)

where           2l+1
                   4π      inS     l,m,I    (r) is the Racah’s normalization factor for the solid harmonics part, re-
sulting in R π        R  2π
                  0    0   sinθdθdϕS      ∗l,m,I    (r)S       l,m,I    (r)=         4π2l+1      r2l  . The normalization factor,N  solidl,m,I     , is defined
as                                                                       s
                                                          N solid             (2Z     I/π)      3/2   (4Z     I)l
                                                              l,I     =            (2l−1)!!     .                                                (74)

The GTO can also be written with real spherical harmonics as:

                                           ψl,m,I    (r)=N           sphel,m,I ·|R I−r|      l·RI(r)·Y       l,m  (θ  I,ϕI),                                  (75)

whereθ               I andϕ         I are polar (0≤θ<π) and azimuthal (0≤ϕ<2π) angles in the spherical coordinate
whose origin isR    I,Y l,m  (θ,ϕ) is the real spherical harmonics, andN              sphel,I     is the normalization factor:
                                                                      s
                                                       N sphe             22l+3    (l+1)!(2Z                    I)l+  32
                                                          l,I     =              (2l+2)!  √π   .                                             (76)
                                                                                                                       vt

                                                                                                           l,m,I           2l+1
Notice that the relation between the normalizations factors isN solidN sphe                                       =           4π     .
                                                                                                           l,m,I

2.    Gaussian-Type Atomic orbitals with Cartesian basis functions

     Primitive atomic orbitals (ψ  l,m,I    (r)) with Cartesian basis functions are given in the following
Gaussian form:
                                        ψnx,n y,n z,I (r)=N           cartnx,n y,n z,I·e−Z   I·|R   I−r|      2·Pnx,n y,n z(x,y,z),                              (77)

whereP               nx,n y,n z(x,y,z)=x                  nxyny xnz,N  cartnx,n y,n z,I  is the normalization factor for an orbital (n  x,n y,n z,I)
discussed later. The normalizationN                                  cartnx,n y,n z,I  is computed as:
                            s                                                               vut
        N cart                          (2Z     I/π)      3/2   (4Z     I)nx+n   y+n   z        (2Z     I/π)      3/2   (8Z     I)nx+n   y+n   znx!n  y!n  z!
           nx,n y,n z,I  =      (2n     x−1)!!(2n                  y−1)!!(2n                  z−1)!! ≡     (2n     x)!(2n         y)!(2n         z)!    .       (78)


                                                                              21
The total angular momentumlis defined asl=n                                        x +n    y +n    z. jQMC stores the polynomial functions
in the canonical (or alphabetical) ordering, as in TREX-IO20, e.g.,l=0→s,l=1→p                                           x,p y,p z,
l =2→d              xx,d  xy,d  xz,d yy,d yz,d zz.  Notice that the above equation implies that the normalization
factor is not common for all orbitals with the samelexcept forsandporbitals. For instance, for
dxx andd         xy orbitals,                                      r
                                                   N cart              (2Z     I/π)      3/2   (4Z     I)2
                                                      2,0,0,I       =             3     ,                                               (79)

while
                                                    N cart1,1,0,I       = p(2Z     I/π)      3/2   (4Z     I)2.                                                (80)


IV.    COULOMB INTERACTION AND EFFECTIVE CORE POTENTIAL

    The potential term is decomposed into two parts, bare Coulomb interactions and effective core
potential parts,V(x)=V                            bare(x)+V           ecp(x). The bare Coulomb part is further decomposed into three
components. i.e.,V         bare(x)=V           ei(x)+V           ee(x)+V           ii(x). They are:
                                                                        X          ZI
                                                        Vei(x)=−              |r l−R    I|,                                                   (81)
                                                                          l,I

                                                                       X          1
                                                         Vee(x)=             |r l−r    l′|,                                                     (82)
                                                                        l′>l

                                                                      X        ZI′ZI
                                                        Vii(x)=             |R I′−R    I|.                                                    (83)
                                                                      I′>I
Notice that the electron-ion potential is often computed with semi-local potentials when ECPs
are employed.   In the latter case,  the atomic numberZ                  I  is replaced by the effective charge,  or
pseudoatomic number,Z  effI  , such that the electron-ion potential readsV             ei(x)=−     Pl,I  ZeffI /|r    l−R    I|.
Nevertheless, in jQMC the electron-ion potential is separated from the semi-local potential part for
the sake of clarity. Thus,V              bare(x) is defined for both all-electron and ECP cases, withZ                I replaced
byZ      effI   in Eqs. 81 and 83 if ECP are used.

    In the presence of ECPs, one should treat their non-local contributions. The semi-local effective
core potential is usually employed in QMC calculations, which for nucleusIis parametrized as
follows:
                                                                             lmaxX
                                                       ˆVi,Iecp =  ˆVi,Ieloc +    ˆVi,Il   ˆPi,Il ,                                                  (84)

                                                                             l=0

                                                                      22
whereiandIare electron and nucleus indices,                    ˆPi,Il   = Plm=−l  |Y lm⟩i,I⟨Y  lm|i,I   projects the angular part
of electroni’s coordinates relative to nucleusIonto the angular momentuml, andV                                                                               i,Ieloc,V  i,Il   are
radial functions ofr     i,I ≡|r i−R    I|.  Both   ˆVi,Ieloc≡V    Ieloc(r  i) and  ˆVi,Il ≡V    Il (r  i) are parametrized with
three parameters,a,b, andn:




                                                                NIX
                              V Ieloc(r  i)=         1|r i−R    I|2 aI,k ·|r i−R    I|nI,k  exp(−b            I,k|r i−R    I|2),                       (85)
                                                                k
                                                            NI,lX
                             V Il (r  i)=         1|r i−R    I|2 aI,k,l ·|r i−R    I|nI,k,l    exp(−b            I,k,l |r i−R    I|2),                      (86)
                                                             k


whereN               I andN         I,l   are the number of ECP terms of the local contribution and the non-local part with
angular momentumlfor nucleusI, respectively.  Following the standard treatment of the semi-
local form4,47,52,53, the action of  ˆVi,Il   ˆPi,Il   on a many-body wave functionΨreduces to an angular
integration at fixed electron-nucleus distancer                    i,I  :


                      ⟨x|    ˆVi,I               Z
                            l   ˆPi,Il|Ψ⟩             dx ′⟨x|    ˆVi,I
                           ⟨x|Ψ⟩              =                   l   ˆPi,Il|x′⟩⟨x ′|Ψ⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩                                                                  (87)

                                                                 lX                Z
                                            =V     i,Il   (r  i,I  ) Ylm(Ω  i,I  )      dΩ ′i,I   Y∗lm(Ω ′i,I  ) Ψ(...,r  ′i,...)Ψ(...,r        i,...)                 (88)
                                                              m=−l       Z
                                            =V     i,I                        dΩ ′i,I   Pl si,I ·s′i,I    Ψ(...,r  ′i,...)
                                                   l   (r  i,I  ) 2l+14π                                  Ψ(...,r        i,...) ,                  (89)




wheres               i,I ≡   ri−R    I|r i−R    I| ands  ′i,I ≡   r′i−R    I|r′i−R    I|.  The last identity of the above equation follows from a
well-known property of the spherical harmonics52, called the addition theorem, Plm=−l      Ylm(Ω)Y  ∗lm(Ω ′)=
2l+1
   4π     Pl(s  i,I ·s′i,I  ) whereP               l(z) is thel-th Legendre polynomial.

    jQMC implements the integration scheme proposed in Ref. 53 to perform a numerical quadra-
ture with tetrahedrical (N  V  =4), octahedrical (N      V  =6,N        V  =18), or icosahedrical (N      V  =12)
symmetry. The quadrature meshes are defined asR     I +δ    m·|r i−R    I|. Since the numerical quadra-
ture is not exact for a general wave function, the direction ofzaxis of the spherical coordinate is
selected randomly,θ(∈[0,π[) andϕ(∈[0,2π[) are selected randomly, to mitigate the bias.  With

                                                                         23
the mesh, the projection is rewritten as a sum ofN     V terms:
       ⟨x|    ˆVi,I           Z
            l   ˆPi,Il|Ψ⟩          dx ′⟨x|    ˆVi,I
            ⟨x|Ψ⟩              =              l   ˆPi,Il|x′⟩⟨x ′|Ψ⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩                                                                                (90)

                               NvX
                          ∼         ⟨x|    ˆVi,Il   ˆPi,Il|x m⟩⟨x  m|Ψ⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩                                                                                   (91)
                              m=1
                               NvX
                          =        (2l+1)·V                  i,Il   (r  i,I  )·w   m·P  l  si,I ·∆  m Ψ(···,R          I +δ    m·|r i−R    I|,···)Ψ(···r        i···)      ,(92)
                              m=1
wherea               m  are the weights of the quadrature,  andδ         m  are the points of the mesh,  and∆         m  is the
normalized one:∆          m≡δ    m/|δ    m|.  The grid points are tabulated in Ref. 53, which are hard-coded
in jQMC. The WF ratios on the grid points are efficiently computed via the fast-update algorithm,
described in Sec. III E, which is critically important for a fast computation for both MCMC and
GFMC.

    The non-local contribution arising from the application of non-local operators is naturally con-
sidered  in  GFMC,  and  more  specifically  in  LRDMC.  Indeed,  in  the  LRDMC  framework,  the
                                                  ΨT (x′)
non-local potentials defined as  ˆVnlx,x ′        ΨT (x)  is nothing but⟨x|       ˆVi,Il   ˆPi,Il|x m⟩⟨x  m|Ψ T⟩⟨x|Ψ      T⟩  for nucleusIand
electroni.  Therefore, within the discretized summation implementation, one needs to consider
only the non-diagonal hoppingsx→x        ′ satisfying|r      ′i−R    I|=|r      i−R    I|. Indeed, one should consid-
ers onlyN           V·N  a·N  e non-diagonal matrix elements at maximum for the non-local PP term, even
if, in practice, we can consider only a few neighboring atomsIto the target electron indexisince
the potential decays exponentially, resulting in reducing the mesh size that should be considered
to∼N        V·N  e.

    With  the  semi-local  ECPs,  the  fixed-node  Hamiltonian  (Eq. 17)  corresponds  to  the  T-move
approximation  of  the  standard  DMC  framework54.    If  one  replacesV                    nlx,x ′ΨT (x′)/Ψ   T (x)  with
Vnlx,x ′DT (x′)/D   T (x), whereD               T represents the determinant part of the trial wave functionΨ                    T, the
resultant fixed-node Hamiltonian corresponds to T-move with determinant locality approximation
(DTM) in the standard DMC framework55.  jQMC implements the two fixed-node Hamiltonians
for calculations with ECPs.


V.    DERIVATIVES OF TOTAL ENERGY


    The total-energy derivatives with respect to the variational parameters are a key component in
order to optimize the many-body wave function.  Similarly, those with respect to atomic coordi-

                                                                24
nates (i.e., atomic forces) are essential for tasks such as geometry optimization, phonon dispersion
calculations, and for making machine-learning interatomic potentials. Algorithmic Differentiation
or Automatic Differentiation (AD) offers a powerful solution to this problem by systematically ap-
plying the chain rule39. AD comes in two primary forms: forward-mode AD (FAD), which prop-
agates derivatives from the inputs to the outputs, and adjoint-mode AD (AAD), which starts from
the outputs to the inputs. They correspond to Jacobian-Vector products (JVPs) and Vector-Jacobian
products (VJPs) in the JAX terminology31, respectively. When the number of input parameters sig-
nificantly exceeds the number of outputs, AAD is more efficient, as it enables the evaluation of
all gradients in a computational time comparable to that of a single function evaluation (e.g., the
energy or wave function). This computational advantage makes AAD particularly well-suited for
QMC simulations involving wave functions with many variational parameters. AAD was first in-
troduced in the QMC context for atomic force calculations in Ref. 39. Our implementation, jQMC,
leverages AAD provided by JAX (e.g. grad) to efficiently compute derivatives of the local energy
and the logarithm of the wave function.



A.    Derivatives with respect to variational parameters (MCMC)


    The energy derivative with respect to a variational parameterα                        k is represented as a generalized
force:
                                        fk =− ∂E   (α)                ⟨Ψ α|  ˆH|Ψ α⟩
                                                   ∂αk    =−  ∂∂αk      ⟨Ψ α|Ψ α⟩ .                                          (93)
In MCMC, the derivative can be evaluated usingMconfigurations of electron coordinates                  4:
                                                 P                            |Ψ α(x)|       2
                                                    x eL(x)    Ok(x)−       ¯Ok
                                      fk =−2                 P
                                                                x|Ψ α(x)|       2                                         (94)
                                                 PM
                                                    i=1   wi eL(x  i) Ok(x  i)−   ¯Ok
                                         ≈−2                  PM
                                                                 i=1   wi       ,

wheree               L (x)  is  the  local  energy, O k (x)  is  the  logarithmic  derivative  of  the  WF, i.e., O     k (x)  =
 ∂                                                                                  MP                MP
∂αk lnΨ   α (x)), and  ¯Ok is its average overMsamples,i.e.,                        ¯Ok =
                                                                                   i=1   wiOk (xi)/  i=1   wi. In jQMC, the
logarithmic derivativeO   k (x) is computed via JAX’s automatic differentiation (grad) functionality.
In jQMC, the derivatives with respect to the wave function parameters are implemented only for
MCMC at present; in the future, they will be implemented also for LRDMC.

                                                            25
B.    Derivatives with respect to nuclear coordinates: Atomic forces (MCMC)


    jQMC employs the differential form of atomic force calculations with the space-warp coordi-
nate transformation (SWCT) technique to reduce the statistical error56:


                                *  d        +       "       *  d                          *
                                                                               1                                 1
                      FI =−       dR   I eL   +2     ⟨eL⟩     dR   I log J     2 Ψ +   −    eL   ddR   I log J   2 Ψ +#                  (95)



whereJis the Jacobian of the SWCT. The SWCT is used to follow the displacement of charges
around the nucleus,


                                                         ¯ri =r    i +dR       IωI (ri),                                                      (96)





                                                    ωI (r) =  κ (|r−R       I|)PNa
                                                                     J=1  κ (|r−R       J|),                                                  (97)


whereκ          (r) is a function that decays sufficiently fast for larger. The original                  56 choice,κ            (r) =1/r          4,
is adopted in jQMC. The parameter derivatives are computed with the partial derivatives of the
local energy and those of the logarithm of the wavefunction39:


                                                   X
         FVMCI      =−    dEdR   I  =− ⟨ ∂E   L∂R   I  + ω (RI,r i)∂E   L∂r   i⟩
                                                      i  ∂logΨ
                                                                          X    "                                 ∂ω (RI,r i)#⟩.  (98)
                                   −2⟨(E           L−E)      ∂R   I    +        ω (RI,r i)∂logΨ∂r   i    + 12         ∂r   i
                                                                            i


                                                                                *∂E   L+    *∂logΨ      +   *∂E   L+   *∂logΨ      +
Here, 6N   e +6N       a components have to be evaluated, i.e.,                           ,               ,          ,               39. The
                                                                                   ∂r   i        ∂r   i       ∂R   I       ∂R   I

dimensions of ∂E   L∂R   I, ∂E   L∂r   i , ∂logΨ∂R   I   , ∂logΨ∂r   i    , and ∂ω (RI,r i)∂r   i       are (N  a,3), (N   e,3), (N   a,3), (N   e,3), and
(N  a,N e,3), respectively.ω   (RI,r i) is always a scalar value. One can define the following matrices

                                                                    26
to compute the force components with a given electronic configurationx:
                                              

                                                 ∂E   R≡ ∂E   L∂R   I                      dim.=(N             a,3),


                                                 ∂E   r,↑ ≡ ∂E   L∂r ↑                     dim.=(N    ↑e,3),
                                                                   i

                                                 ∂E   r,↓ ≡ ∂E   L∂r ↓                     dim.=(N    ↓e,3),
                                                                   i

                                                 ∂Ψ   R≡ ∂logΨ∂R   I                   dim.=(N             a,3),


                                                 ∂Ψ   r,↑ ≡ ∂logΨ∂r ↑                      dim.=(N    ↑e,3),                                                   (99)
                                                                      i

                                                 ∂Ψ   r,↓ ≡ ∂logΨ∂r ↓                      dim.=(N    ↓e,3),
                                                                      i
                                                                    ∂ω RI,r↑i
                                                 ∂Ω   r,↑ ≡ Pi             ∂r ↑            dim.=(N             a,3),
                                                                               i
                                                                    ∂ω RI,r↓i
                                                 ∂Ω   r,↓ ≡ Pi             ∂r ↓            dim.=(N             a,3),
                                                                                          dim.=(N             a,N↑e ).i
                                                 Ω↑≡ω   RI,r↑i
                                                 Ω↓≡ω   RI,r↓                dim.=(N             a,N↓e ).
                                                                        i

Once the objects in Eq. 99 are evaluated and stored, the (N  a,3) force matrixF                  VMC can be obtained
via matrix-matrix operations, according to the following contributions:

                                                                 FVMC =F    HF +F    Pulay,                                                   (100)

where the Hellmann–Feynman (HF) term is

                                                   FHF =−⟨∂E         R + Ω↑∂E   r,↑  + Ω↓∂E   r,↓⟩,                                       (101)

and the Pulay contribution reads


                       FPulay  =−2⟨(E               L−E)(∂Ψ               R + Ω↑∂Ψ   r,↑  + Ω↓∂Ψ   r,↓  + 12(∂Ω     r,↑  +∂Ω       r,↓  ))⟩.            (102)


     We validated the force implementation through the PES calculation of the Hydrogen and Nitro-
gen dimer. To test the implementation, we verified that the the following conditions are satisfied:

                                                                               27
(a) The derivative of the PES with respect to the bond distance should be consistent with the com-
puted atomic forces as long as all the parameters are variationally optimized, and (b), with the
SWCT, the atomic forces acting on the left and right atoms of a dimer should have exactly the
same absolute values57.



C.    Derivatives with respect to nuclear coordinates: Atomic forces (LRDMC)


    In LRDMC, the atomic force computation differs from the MCMC case (Sec. V B) in three
respects: (i) the SWCT is not recommended because it leads to a bias, (ii) the Reynolds approxi-
mation58 is introduced to replace the inaccessible derivative∂Ψ      0/∂R      I with the available∂Ψ                   T/∂R      I,
and (iii) the Pathak-Wagner59 regularization is applied to suppress the divergence of the local en-
ergy derivative near the nodal surface.

    Since the SWCT is typically not used in LRDMC, allΩterms vanish (ω             I  =0), and the force
expression simplifies considerably.  Using the same shorthand notation defined in Sec. V B, the
force on atomIsampled from the mixed distributionΨ                          TΨ0 reads:


                                                   FmixedI      =F    HFmixed +F    Pulaymixed,                                                 (103)


where

                                                    FHFmixed =−⟨∂E         R⟩ΨTΨ0,                                                   (104)

                                             FPulaymixed =−2⟨(E               L−E)∂Ψ             R⟩ΨTΨ0.                                          (105)

Here,⟨·⟩            ΨTΨ0  denotes  the  average  over  the  mixed  distribution  sampled  by  the  LRDMC  walker
population,  in  contrast  to  the  MCMC  average  overΨ     2T.   The  mixed  estimatorF                       mixedI        is  biased
because the sampling distributionΨ            TΨ0 differs from the pure distributionΨ                     20. This approximation
becomes exact whenΨ             T = Ψ0.

    Near the nodal surface ofΨ     T, the local energy and its derivatives can diverge, leading to large
statistical fluctuations in the force estimator. To mitigate this issue, we employ the Pathak–Wagner
regularization59.   According to the reweighting method,  the bracket⟨O⟩is evaluated using the
regularized estimator with a functionR        η(x):

                                                        ¯O=⟨O(x)R         η(x)⟩.                                                      (106)

                                                                28
Here,                                          
                                  Rη(x)=         7ζ/η 6−15  ζ/η 4 +9  ζ/η 2,   ζ/η ≤1,                           (107)

                                                 1,                                ζ/η >1,

with

                                                            ζ=   Ψ(x)∇Ψ(x)|∇Ψ(x)|                 2 .                                                       (108)

Here,∇denotes the many-body gradient, collecting all particle-coordinate derivatives into a single
vector. Defining
                                                            Qi,k ≡ ∂∂r   i,k  Ψ(x),                                                       (109)

one may regardQas an (N              e,3) matrix. Then,

                                                           |∇Ψ(x)|                 2 =∥Q∥           2F,                                                       (110)

and                                       ζ/η  = |Ψ(x)|

                                                                        η∥Q∥          F,                                                        (111)
where∥·∥               F denotes the Frobenius norm. The quantityζrepresents the normal distance betweenx
and the nearest nodal point ofΨ, whileηcontrols the distance from the nodal surface within which
the regularization is applied.
    Each expectation values entering the total force are regularized as follows:

                                                  FHFmixed =−⟨∂E         R·R η(x)⟩      ΨTΨ0,                                             (112)

                                           FPulaymixed =−2⟨(E               L−E)∂Ψ             R·R η(x)⟩      ΨTΨ0,                                     (113)

whereR      η(x) is the regularization function defined in Eq. (107), which smoothly suppresses contri-
butions from walkers within a distanceηof the nodal surface.


VI.    OPTIMIZATION OF WFs

    Optimizing the variational parameters of the many-body wave function is the most challeng-
ing task inab initioQMC calculations.  Since the QMC energy (and sometimes the variance) is
evaluated stochastically and is strongly nonlinear in the variational parameters, a straightforward
optimization method such as gradient descent does not work and is extremely inefficient.   The
wave-function optimization in the context ofab initioQMC has been studied for a long time.

                                                                    29
Stochastic Reconfiguration (SR)  37 developed by Sorella, the Linear method (LM)  60 developed
by Umrigar et al., and their variants 60–62 are the most widely adopted optimization methods in the
QMC community. jQMC implements both of them.

    In both SR and LR, themetricfor the parameter space (S), which measures the distance of the
underlying normalized wavefunction63, plays a central role.  The normalized wavefunction at the
given variational parametersαis defined as

                                                | ˜Ψα⟩=|Ψ   α⟩/ p⟨Ψ α|Ψα⟩,                                                 (114)


while its derivatives with respect to the variational parameters define asemi-orthogonalbasis set:

                             | ˜Ψαk⟩=  ∂∂αk| ˜Ψα⟩=(     ˆOk−  ¯Ok)|  ˜Ψα⟩,        k=1,...,P,                          (115)


wherePis the total number of variational parameters,               ˆOk is the logarithmic derivative operator,
whose sample-wise representation, introduced in Sec. V A, isO    k(x)=∂logΨ         α(x)/∂α       k, and  ¯Ok =
⟨ ˜Ψα| ˆOk| ˜Ψα⟩is its expectation value. Then, themetricfor the parameter space (S), which is based
on the overlap matrix between thesemi-orthogonalbasis components, is computed as:


       Sk,k ′ =⟨   ˜Ψαk| ˜Ψαk′⟩≡⟨ ˜Ψα|(  ˆOk−  ¯Ok)( ˆOk′−  ¯Ok′)|  ˜Ψα⟩= ⟨Ψ α|(  ˆOk−  ¯Ok)( ˆOk′−  ¯Ok′)|Ψ α⟩⟨Ψ α|Ψα⟩       .        (116)



A.    Stochastic Reconfiguration (a.k.a. natural gradient optimization)


    SR is a nonlinear optimization method for many-body wave functions developed by Sorella37.
It uses a positive-definite preconditioning matrixSwhich represents the metric of the parameter
space (Eq. 116), and the generalized force vectorf(Eq. 93), such that during an optimization step
the WF parameters are updated as follows:


                                                 αk→α      k + ∆·   S−1  f k.                                                  (117)


The  matrixSis  stochastically  evaluated  usingMsamplesx=           {x1,x 2,...x  M}  (for  the  simple
MCMC) with weightsw=    {w1,w 2,...w  M} (for the weighted MCMC):


                                              MP     Ok (xi)−  ¯Ok  Ok′ (xi)−  ¯Ok′
                                    Sk,k ′ =  i=1   wi         PM

                                                                  i=1   wi         ,                                  (118)

                                                            30
                                                           MP                 MP
whereO               k (xi)  =  ∂∂αklogΨ   α (xi),   ¯Ok  =
                                                           i=1   wiOk (xi)/  i=1   wi,  andf is  computed  as  in  Eq.  94  of
Sec. V A. We notice that the natural gradient method64  developed by Amari et al.   in a differ-
ent context and used for machine learning in recent years has a direct correspondence with the
SR.

    The native SR method often suffers from numerical instabilities because the statistical noise
makes the matrixSill-conditioned                    62.  jQMC mitigates the problem by the following numerical
technique. First, to simplify the computation65 and to stabilize the solution, jQMC introduces the
quantities                                                          √
                                             Xk,i ≡X    k(x  i)=      wi(O  k(x  i)−   ¯Ok)q,                                         (119)
                                                                            PM
                                                                               i=1   wi
and
                                              ei≡e(x        i)= −2 √wi(e  L(x  i)−¯e        L)q,                                          (120)
                                                                          PM
                                                                             i=1   wi
which giveS=XX           T  andf =Xe.  To makeSscale-invariant                        4, Xis rescaled row-wise by the
inverse square root of the diagonal ofS:

                                                        Xk,i ←X      k,i /pSk,k .                                                      (121)

Notice thatedoes not need to be rescaled separately, since the rescaling offis considered via
f=Xe. In this normalized basis, the regularized SR update reads

                                                  δθ=τ(XX              T +ε    SRIP)−1  Xe,                                               (122)

wherePis the total number of variational parameters. After solving forδθin the normalized basis,
the natural-gradient direction is rescaled back viaδθ       k←δθ      k/pSk,k  .

    The above reformulation also enables the use of the well-known push-through identity tech-
nique66,67, namely (AB+λI)    −1  A=A(BA+λI)       −1  :

                                                  δθ=τX(X                  T X+ε       SRIM)−1  e,                                               (123)

which is more efficient when the number of samplesMis smaller than the number of parameters
P.

    Either with or without the push-through identity technique, jQMC does not compute the inverse
of the matrixXX                T  orX     T X.  Instead, it solves the inversion problem using the conjugate gradient

                                                                 31
(CG) method.   Let each MPI rank hold a local blockX              (d) ∈R   P×M       d,  wherePis the number of
variational parameters andM         d is the number of MCMC samples held by rankd.  The globalXis
thenX=        X(1),X  (2), ...,X  (D)  ∈R   P×M ,    M=    PDd=1    Md.In the CG mode, jQMC never assembles
S≡XX        T∈R   P×P     orX     T X∈R       M×M    ; it only stores the distributed blocksX                (d)   and auxiliary vectors.
More specifically, jQMC implements a matrix-free CG method to solve  S+ε        SRIPθ=f(or its
dual form), where each rankdindependently computes only its local matrix-vector contributions.
Indeed, before starting the CG iterations, the right-hand side is constructed asf=    PDd=1    X(d)  e(d)  ,
where all ranks first compute their local contributions (X  (d)  e(d)  ), summed them up using a global
all-reduce.  Then, during the CG iterations, each rank repeatedly computes its local contribution,
v7→X         (d)   X(d)T    v ,and a global all-reduce is then used to obtainv7→         PDd=1    X(d)   X(d)T    v  +ε    SRv.
This naturally distributes both memory and compute workloads among CPUs or GPUs, yielding
excellent weak-scaling behavior without storing the full SR matrix, as demonstrated in Sec. XII.

    In practice, during an optimization, jQMC monitors the variational energy (E) and the maxi-
mum value of the signal to noise ratio among all the force components:
                                                                                             fk  !
                                       signal-to-noise  ratio≡max             k            σ fk                                  (124)

whereσ               fk represents the estimated error bar of the forcef            k. This value is used in jQMC as one of
the convergence criteria of the WF optimization.


B.    The Linear method and its variants

    The  LM  starts  from  the  linear  expansion  of  the  normalized  variational  wave  function  with
respect to the variational parametersα:

                                                                pX                   pX
                                     | ˜Ψα+δα0 ⟩=|     ˜Ψα0⟩+      δαk| ˜Ψαk⟩≡          zk| ˜Ψαk⟩,                                 (125)
                                                              k=1                  k=0
wherez               0 =1 andz            k =δα    k fork≥1. Here,|                   ˜Ψ0,α⟩≡| ˜Ψα⟩is the normalized wavefunction defined
in Eq. 114, and|       ˜Ψk,α⟩is thesemi-orthogonalbasis defined in Eq. 115. By construction, this basis
satisfies⟨             ˜Ψα0| ˜Ψαk⟩=0 for allk≥1. Using this expansion, the variational energy is written as
                                                                        Pp
                               Eα+δα     =⟨ ˜Ψα+δα0 | ˆH|    ˜Ψα+δα0 ⟩    Ppk,k ′=0   zkzk′⟨ ˜Ψαk| ˆH|    ˜Ψαk′⟩
                                             ⟨ ˜Ψα+δα0 | ˜Ψα+δα0 ⟩   =       k,k ′=0   zkzk′⟨ ˜Ψαk| ˜Ψαk′⟩ .                          (126)
Stationarity with respect toz     l leads to the generalized eigenvalue problem

                                                            Hz=ESz,                                                           (127)

                                                                32
with
                                          Hk,k ′ =⟨   ˜Ψαk| ˆH|    ˜Ψαk′⟩,  S    k,k ′ =⟨   ˜Ψαk| ˜Ψαk′⟩.                                   (128)

The matrix elements can be evaluated efficiently by Monte Carlo sampling overπ(x)∝|Ψ          α(x)|       2.
In particular,
                                            ⟨ ˜Ψαk| ˆH|    ˜Ψαk′⟩=  D(O  k(x)−       ¯Ok)W  k′(x)  Eπ(x)  ,                                     (129)

where
                                                    Wk(x)=  ⟨x|     ˆH(    ˆOk−  ¯Ok)|Ψ α⟩⟨x|Ψ  α⟩    .                                             (130)

This quantity is related to the derivatives of the local energy:
                                  ∂E   L(x)
                                     ∂αk    =⟨x|     ˆH(    ˆOk−  ¯Ok)|  ˜Ψ0,α⟩⟨x|    ˜Ψ0,α⟩   −E    L(x)(O         k(x)−       ¯Ok),                          (131)
so that
                                             Wk(x)=   ∂E   L(x)∂αk    +E    L(x)(O         k(x)−       ¯Ok).                                      (132)

We  notice  that  if  the  local  energy  is  real,  then⟨∂E   L(x)/∂α       k⟩  =0  (see  Ref.  68).   Substituting
Eq. (132) into Eq. (129), the LM Hamiltonian matrix is naturally decomposed asH=K+B, with

                                                Kk,k ′ =⟨δO         k(x)δO          k′(x)E       L(x)⟩   π(x)  ,                                         (133)

                                                 Bk,k ′ =⟨δO         k(x)  ∂E   L(x)∂αk′ ⟩π(x)  ,                                                   (134)

whereδO                 k(x) =O           k(x)−       ¯Ok.   TheKmatrix  is  symmetric  inkandk        ′,  whereasBinherits  the
asymmetry  of  theWderivation.   Since  the  exactHis  hermitian  (symmetric  for  the  real  wave
functions considered in this study),K+Bis symmetrized post-hoc asH←(H+H                                                       T)/2 in jQMC
to avoid the numerical instaibility.

    We note that the elements of the LM overlap (S) and Hamiltonian (H) matrices involving the
zeroth basis state are given as follows. Since the derivative basis is semi-orthogonal to the current
normalized wave function, we haveS   00  =1 andS            0k   =S    k0   =0    (k≥1).  The corresponding
Hamiltonian matrix elements areH       00 =⟨   ˜Ψα0| ˆH|    ˜Ψα0⟩=E  α,H k0  =⟨   ˜Ψαk| ˆH|    ˜Ψα0⟩= ⟨δO   k(x)E       L(x) ⟩π(x)    =

−12 fk, andH         0k  =⟨   ˜Ψα0| ˆH|    ˜Ψαk⟩= ⟨Wk(x) ⟩π(x)    =−   12 fk. wheref               k (fork≥1) is the same as in Eq. 93.

    The original LM optimizes allPparameters simultaneously by solving the full (P+1)×(P+1)
generalized eigenvalue problem60,61,68. In practice, however, this can be numerically unstable and
computationally expensive when many parameters with very different scales are present. For this
reason, jQMC uses two practical variants based on the SR directiong                     k =(S  −1  f)  k, inspired by the
TurboRVB’s implementation62.

                                                                       33
1.    Linear method with only the SR direction


    The first practical variant addresses a key limitation of the original LM formalism, which re-
quires solving a generalized eigenvalue problem with allPvariational parameters.  This variant
keeps only the SR direction and removes all individual parameter directions. In this case, the LM
update is constrained to
                                               δαk =γg       k,        g k =(S  −1  f)  k,                                             (135)

so that the optimization reduces to a single scalarγ. The energy becomes

                                                Eα+δα     =  H0 +2γH          1 +γ    2H21+γ       2S 2   ,                                             (136)

with
                   H0 =E  α,        H 1 =−   12gTf,        H   2 =g    T(K+B)g,        S                      2 =g    TSg.             (137)

MinimizingE(γ) yields a quadratic equation,

                                            H1S 2γ2 +(H      0S 2−H    2)γ−H         1 =0,                                         (138)

whose solution is                                             q
                                           H2−H    0S 2±         (H  2−H    0S 2)2 +4H       21S 2
                                     γ=                          2H   1S 2           .                                 (139)

In jQMC, the root with the smaller absolute value is selected in order to avoid spuriously large
steps. The final parameter update is simply

                                                            δαk =γg       k.                                                            (140)


2.    Linear method with the SR collective variable and selected parameters

    For a more efficient approach, we combine a singleglobal SR collective mode, which considers
the contribution of all parameters through the SR matrixS    −1  , combined with a small set ofindi-
vidually resolved directionscorresponding to the parameters whose generalized forces have large
signal-to-noise ratios.  Thus, the SR direction provides a global update for all parameters, while
the selected directions based on the signal-to-ratios allow the LM to assign individually optimized
steps to the few chosen parameters that should be far from their local minima.  Specifically, we
define the SR collective state
                                                      PX
                                         | ˜ΨSR⟩=         gk| ˜Ψαk⟩,        g    k =(S  −1  f)  k,                                      (141)
                                                     k=1

                                                                34
where the sum runs over all variational parameters. The SR direction provides a well-conditioned
collective mode that automatically incorporates the scale information encoded in the overlap ma-
trix. We then diagonalize the LM in the reduced subspace
                                           n| ˜Ψα
                                                0⟩,|   ˜ΨSR⟩,|   ˜Ψαk1⟩, ...,|   ˜Ψαkm⟩o,                                           (142)

wherek               1,...,k  m  denote a small set of selected parameters.   In jQMC, these are chosen as the
parameters with the largest signal-to-noise ratio of the generalized forcef            k, so that noisy directions
are excluded from the explicit LM subspace. The generalized eigenvalue problem retains the same
form, as in Eq. 127:
                                                          ¯Hv=E        ¯Sv,                                                           (143)

but now in a reduced (m+2)-dimensional basis. The matrix elements involving the SR collective
variable follow from linearity:

                      ¯H0,SR   =−   12gTf,           ¯HSR,SR     =g    T(K+B)g,                       ¯SSR,SR     =g    TSg,                 (144)

and similarly for the mixed SR-selected-parameter blocks. The final update is written as
                                                      
                                  δαk =  vSR            vki/v   0,   k=k        i∈{k  1,...,k  m},                        (145)
                                            v0  gk +    0,          otherwise.

Thus, this variant supplements the global SR direction by a few individually optimized corrections.


C.    Optimization of molecular orbital coefficients with constraints

    In jQMC, the nodal surface of the wave function can be optimized via the determinant part,
namely, the geminal matrixΛ    ↑,↓l,l ′  [Eq. (43)]. The most straightforward strategy is an unconstrained
optimization, that is, optimizing all independent variational parameters in the geminal matrix sub-
ject only to the required symmetry.  jQMC implements this simplest scheme.  In addition, jQMC
also  implements  the  molecular-orbital-constrained  optimization  introduced  in  TurboRVB4,69,70.
According to this scheme,  one can optimize the geminal matrixΛ    ↑↓  expanded over the atomic
orbitals (Eq. 55) by preserving a targeted rank of the matrix, chosen in input. For AGP wave func-
tions, this approach makes it possible to introduce an effective coherence-length cutoffin the AGP
matrix4, for both insulators and metals, because the AO representation bears information on the
correlation length of the geminal, through the ionic centers of the AO basis.  Moreover, the AGP

                                                             35
expanded over atomic orbitals has an equivalent natural orbital representation in its AGPn or SD
form, expanded over molecular orbitals. Therefore, by constraining the rank ofΛ, the optimization
can be carried out with a fixed number of molecular orbitals retained in the projection, denoted by
n(n=N            e/2 for SD andn>N                  e/2 for AGPn), while exploiting the locality of the geminal built in
the corresponding AO expansion. We describe the implementation of the fixed-rank optimization
below. We notice that, following the convention stated at the beginning of Sec. II, all orbitals and
the geminal matrix are taken to be real.

    Below, we focus on the paired blockΛ   ↑,↓    of the geminal matrix;  the unpaired blockΛ   ↑  has
no spin-down index and therefore no rank constraint, and is treated separately at the end of this
Subsection. To keep the formulas simple, we specialize the derivation to the spin-unpolarized SD
reference, wheren=N                     e/2=N   ↓e  and thenretained MOs coincide with the occupied MOs; we
therefore use the standard occupied/virtual terminology throughout the rest of the subsection
instead of retained/discarded.  The same formulas can be applied for AGPn (n>N                              e/2) with
occupied replaced with the retainedn-dimensional MO subspace, and to the spin-polarized case
via the substitutions for spin-dependent MO coefficients.

    As shown in Eq. (65), the AGP pairing function (the spin-↑,↓part) can be represented in the
MO basis as:                                                    nX
                                             F↑,↓  (r,r  ′)=        λµΦµ(r)Φ   µ(r ′),                                           (146)
                                                               µ=1
where{Φ       µ}nµ=1     are  thenoccupied  MOs  and{λ        µ}the  corresponding  weights  (λ  µ  =1  for  SD).
Expanding the occupied MOs in the AO basis:
                                                                X     ˜Cl,µψl(r),                                                   (147)
                                                    Φµ(r)=
                                                                  l
the pairing function takes the AO basis representation:
                                                              X
                                             F↑,↓  (r,r  ′)=                l,l ′ψl′(r ′),                                           (148)
                                                               l,l ′ ψl(r)Λ  ↑,↓
with
                                                         Λ↑,↓   =  ˜Cλ    ˜CT,                                                         (149)

whereλ=diag(λ                                   1,...,λn) is the (n,n) diagonal matrix of weights and        ˜Cis the (M      ao,n) matrix
of occupied MO coefficients; thus,rank(Λ         ↑,↓  )≤n.  The columns of        ˜Csatisfy     ˜CTS ˜C=I        n withS
being the AO overlap matrix.  We notice that, in this Section, the row and column indices of the
MO coefficients           ˜Care flipped compared withCin Eq. 59 to follow the same notation as Ref. 4.

                                                               36
    A linearized rank-preserving variation is obtained by changing only the quantities that appear
in Eq. (149), namely  ˜Candλ.  Under             ˜C→     ˜C+δ      ˜Candλ→λ+δλ, the first-order variation of
the geminal matrix is
                                        (δΛ ↑,↓  )c =δ   ˜Cλ    ˜CT +  ˜Cδλ      ˜CT +  ˜Cλδ      ˜CT.                                  (150)

Here,δ          ˜Cdenotes  an  arbitrary  infinitesimal  change  of  the  occupied  MO  coefficients.   We  now
introduce the AO-basis representations of the left and right projectors associated with the occupied
MO subspace:

                                                   R=(S        ˜C)    ˜CT,                                                                      (151)

                                                   L=R        T =  ˜C(S     ˜C)    T =  ˜C ˜CTS,                                              (152)

where  ˜Cis the same MO-coefficient matrix appearing in Eq. (149), satisfying                     ˜CTS ˜C=I        n, andS
is the AO overlap matrix.Lacts on MO coefficient vectors from the left and is theS-orthogonal
projector onto the occupied MO subspace, and thus, (I−L) is the complementary projector onto
the virtual MO subspace, in the AO-basis representation69. These matrices satisfy

                           L2 =L,        R         2 =R,        (I−L)               ˜C=0,                 ˜CT(I−R)=0.                    (153)

The last two identities are the only ingredients needed to identify the forbidden component of a
rank-nvariation. Applying the virtual projector on both AO indices of Eq. (150) gives

              (I−L)(δΛ     ↑,↓  )c(I−R)

               =(I−L)δ             ˜Cλ     ˜CT(I−R)|      {z      }+(I−L)           ˜C|    {z    }δλ    ˜CT(I−R)|      {z      }+(I−L)           ˜C|    {z    }λδ   ˜CT(I−R)

                                            =0                =0                   =0               =0
               =0.                                                                                                                           (154)

Thus, every first-order variation generated within the factorized rank-nform has no virtual–virtual
component:
                                                    (I−L)(δΛ     ↑,↓  )c(I−R)=0.                                               (155)

Equivalently,  the virtual–virtual block is absent from the tangent space of the rank-nAGP/SD
ansatz.   Therefore,  the virtual–virtual component is the only component that must be removed
from an arbitrary AO-basis variation in order to impose this linearized rank-nconstraint.

    This observation gives a practical way to impose the rank constraint on an arbitrary optimization
update. In other words, by eliminating the virtual–virtual component from a variation matrix, one

                                                                    37
can obtain a linearized rank-constrained update. The forbidden virtual–virtual component is

                                            (δα ↑,↓  )vv =(I−L)δα     ↑,↓  (I−R).                                           (156)

Therefore, the constrained variation is obtained by subtracting only this forbidden component:

                                       (δα ↑,↓  )c =δα  ↑,↓ −(I−L)δα     ↑,↓  (I−R).                                     (157)

This  projection  leaves  the  occupied–occupied,  occupied–virtual,  and  virtual–occupied  compo-
nents unchanged,  while it removes the virtual–virtual component.   Therefore,  (δα ↑,↓  )c  satisfies
Eq. (155) and keeps the rank-nAGP ansatz.

    In  this  Subsection,δα        ↑,↓    denotes  the  matrix-valued  variation  of  the  paired  geminal  matrix
Λ↑,↓    in  the  AO  basis,  with  matrix  elementsα      ↑,↓l,l ′  (dimension  (M  ao,M ao)).   In  addition,  the  per-
sample logarithmic derivative for paired-block parameters is treated as a matrixO                paired with en-
tries (O  paired)l,l ′ =∂logΨ/∂α     ↑,↓l,l ′ . This differs from the 1D flattened indexkused in Secs. VI A and
VI B, whereα               k andO         k are scalars; the two views are related by unfolding the 1D indexkinto the
matrix index pair (l,l ′). The jQMC implementation matches this picture: the per-sampleO-matrix
is held with a 1D parameter axis, and only the lambda block is temporarily reshaped to 2D for the
projection.

    In practice, the rank constraint of Eq. (157) is enforced not only directly on the final parameter
update but also upstream on the per-sample logarithmic-derivative matrixO                paired, from which the
generalized force, the SR matrix, and the LM matrices are constructed4,69. Specifically, the paired
observable is replaced by

                                    ˜Opaired  =O    paired −(I−L            T)O  paired (I−R        T)                                  (158)

before any downstream optimization quantity is formed4,69.  After solving the SR/LM equations,
the paired update is projected once more via Eq. (157) to exactly fulfill the rank constraint.

    For spin-polarized systems with unpaired electrons, the geminal matrix in the AO-basis rep-
resentation  is  composed  of  the  spin-paired  and  spin-unpaired  blocks  (Eq.  51).   Since  the  rank
constraint originates from the paired block,F    ↑,↓  ,  the optimization constraint should be applied
only to the paired geminal blockΛ   ↑,↓  .  The unpaired blockΛ   ↑  carries no spin-down index and
possesses no virtual–virtual subblock;  neither the corresponding logarithmic derivativeO   unpaired
nor the unpaired parameter updateδα     ↑ is therefore subjected to any projection, and the unpaired
part is optimized exactly as in the unconstrained SR/LM scheme of Secs. VI A and VI B.

                                                              38
VII.    IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS


   jQMC clearly separatesdataandalgorithms.  Data structures are implemented using Python
dataclass. More specifically, we take thestructclass from theflaxlibrary, which is compat-
ible with JAX’sjitandgrad. Algorithms are then defined as functions that take these data class
instances, along with electron coordinates and control parameters. An overview of the data classes
and algorithms used in jQMC is provided in Table I, and the dependency relationships among the
data classes are depicted as a diagram in Figure 1.





   In jQMC, all computational kernels are JIT-compiled by JAX. These include the updates of
electron  positions  in  MCMC,  the  evaluation  ofe     L  and∂e            L,  and  other  observables,  as  well  as
the updates of electron positions in GFMC. In this sense, the numerically intensive kernels are
executed on the GPU, while the CPU is used primarily for compilation and orchestration.  The
branching step in LRDMC, however, is still performed on CPUs.  After the walker weights have
been updated, the branching procedure based on these weights is executed on the CPU, because
this step involves many conditional operations and also requires complex MPI communication
associated with walker replication and deletion.

   JAX transfers host data such as NumPy arrays from the CPU to the GPU when they are con-
verted into JAX arrays or supplied to GPU-executed JAX computations. To avoid additional imple-
mentation complexity and to minimize repeated host–device transfers, we adopt a design in which
the data required for the main numerical kernels is kept on the GPU whenever possible,  while
the memory demand on the GPU increases because most of the data required for the computation
must reside in the GPU memory.

   A typical workflow for performing LRDMC calculations with jQMC is illustrated in Figure 2.
As it is standard in QMC simulations, the process begins by constructing a trial wave function,
which typically requires input from HF or DFT calculations.   jQMC supports the construction
of trial wave functions via the TREX-IO interface, making it easy to import wave function data
from many establishedab initioelectronic structure packages, such as PySCF                                       71.  Once the trial
wave function is imported, one may proceed to optimize the Jastrow factor and, if necessary, the
determinant part. After the wave function optimization is completed, one can perform single-point

                                                        39
                      TABLE I.  The main dataclasses and classes implemented in jQMC.

  Type               Module/Class               Description

                 Hamiltonian        data        Holds all information needed to evaluate the Hamiltonian, includ-

                                                ing structure, Coulomb potential, and wave function parameters.
                   Structure      data          Stores  atomic  positions  in  3D  space,  atomic  numbers,  element

                                                symbols, and textual labels for each atom.

                    AOs   cart   data           Contains Cartesian atomic-orbital basis details such as the num-
Dataclass                                       ber  of  orbitals,  contraction  exponents  and  coefficients,  angular

                                                momenta, and polynomial orders for each Cartesian component.

                    AOs   sphe   data           Contains spherical atomic-orbital basis details including the num-
                                                ber  of  orbitals,  contraction  exponents  and  coefficients,  angular

                                                momenta, and magnetic quantum numbers for each center.

            Coulomb      potential      data    Stores Coulomb interaction parameters or effective core potential
                                                (ECP) data such as core charges, angular momentum cutoffs, ra-

                                                dial exponents, coefficients, and powers for each nucleus.

                       MOs   data               Describes molecular-orbital information by storing the total num-
                                                ber of MOs, the underlying atomic-orbital basis reference, and the

                                                MO coefficient arrays.

                    Geminal      data           Represents  the  pairing  (geminal)  matrix  and  orbitals  for  spin-
                                                up and spin-down electrons along with their respective electron

                                                counts.

                    Jastrow      data           Aggregates all Jastrow factor data by combining one-body, two-
                                                body, and three-body Jastrow parameter sets.

               wave  function        data       Encapsulates the complete wave function description by combin-

                                                ing Jastrow data and geminal pairing information.

                          MCMC                  Implements  Markov-Chain  Monte  Carlo  method  and  manages
  Class                                         variational Monte Carlo (WF optimization).

                          GFMC                  Implements  Green  Function  Monte  Carlo  method  for  LRDMC

                                                calculations.




                                                            40
FIG. 1.  The diagram of the main jQMC data classes.  Each box represents a data class.  The solid arrows

demonstrate relations among the data classes. The broken arrows link a data class with calling functions.



                                                              41
FIG. 2.  A typical workflow of jQMC to perform VMC, MCMC and LRDMC calculations starting from a

HF/DFT calculation.


MCMC or LRDMC calculations. In the case of LRDMC, simulations are carried out with several
lattice discretizations, and an extrapolation to the zero-lattice-spacing limit (a→0) is performed
to obtain unbiased energy estimates.



VIII.    MIXED-PRECISION SUPPORT


   jQMC supports mixed-precision calculations.  In jQMC, AO (except for gradients and Lapla-
cian calculations) and Jastrow evaluations are performed using 32-bit floating-point (FP32). This
works because the rounding errors in the AO evaluation from low-precision calculations are mit-
igated by the summation performed during MO calculations (in the case of SD) or geminal cal-
culations (in the case of AGP), which are carried out in 64-bit floating-point (FP64).   Further-
more,  since  the  Jastrow  term  involves  an  exponential  (exp)  function,  its  rounding  errors  from
low-precision calculations are smoothed out by the exp function. In particular, using FP32 in AO
evaluations yields a significant speed-up because many computationally intensive exponential cal-
culations are required for GTO evaluations, and single-precision transcendental operations such
as exp function are typically executed on special function units (SFUs), which are distinct from
the main FP32/FP64 arithmetic pipelines              72.  Comparison of FP32/FP64 (mixed) and FP64 (full)
calculations for water clusters is listed in Table II. The table shows that both calculations yield en-

                                                         42
TABLE  II.  Comparison  of  MCMC  total  energies  obtained  with  full  (FP64)  and  mixed  (FP32q          +FP64)

precision.∆E=E                                mixed−E    full, andσ        c =σ2full +σ   2mixed. The speedup ist    full/t  mixed, where eachtis the net
MCMC time summed over the restart chunks, divided by the total number of production steps. Numbers in

parentheses indicate the statistical error on the last digits.
                 System      Ne      Efull (Ha)  E          mixed (Ha)∆E(Ha)|∆E|/σ                                    cSpeedup

                 H2O         8    -17.21800(16)   -17.21795(16)+5.0×10            −5      0.22      1.22×

                 (H2O)2      16   -34.43316(14)   -34.43297(14)+1.9×10            −4      0.96      1.40×
                 (H2O)4      32   -68.86243(16)   -68.86253(16)−1.0×10            −4      0.44      1.22×

                 (H2O)6      48  -103.28575(16) -103.28556(16)+1.9×10            −4      0.84       1.30×

                 (H2O)8      64  -137.70573(16) -137.70516(16)+5.7×10            −4      2.52       1.46×
                 (H2O)20    160  -343.92181(15) -343.92162(16)+1.9×10            −4      0.87       1.30×


ergies that are consistent within the error bars (3σ) for all compounds (even when the number of
electrons is increased up to 160), and that FP32/FP64 calculations are approximately twice as fast
as the full-precision ones.  We notice that users can switch between the full and mixed precisions
via an input flag (the default is the full precision). In the following sections, full precision is used
in Secs. X, XII, XIII, andXIV, whereas the mixed precision is used in Secs IX and XI.



IX.    VECTORIZATION STRATEGY


    Within a single process,  vectorization injQMCis realized throughJAX’svmapfunction.   In
QMC algorithms, the top-level and most significant vectorization is overwalkers.  Since walkers
in QMC simulations evolve nearly independently, batching over walkers provides the most natural
and efficient way to exploit vectorization on modern hardware.  As a result, to maximize single-
GPU performance, especially in QMC algorithms where matrix-matrix or matrix-vector operations
inside the inner loops are not dominant in computational cost,  it is generally most efficient to
assign as many walkers as possible to each GPU, up to the point where the GPU’s computational
or memory throughput is saturated.

    Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate the MCMC and LRDMC throughputs as the number of walkers
per GPU is varied, for water clusters ranging from a single water molecule (N  e =8) to a cluster
of twenty water molecules (N  e  =160),  using a single node of theMiyabiGPU cluster at the

                                                            43
44
FIG. 3. The MCMC throughput as a function of the number of walkers per GPU. The vertical axis represents

MCMC steps×number of walkers per sec., which measures the actual computational power of the QMC
runs.   Each panel shows the four combinations of basis representation (spherical/cartesian GTOs) and

precision (full/mixed precision).  The benchmark was performed for six systems, but only three of them,

water(N                e =8),water  cluster  [8](N                    e =64), andwater  cluster  [20](N                         e =160), are plotted here.
These benchmark tests were measured on a single Miyabi-G GPU node (NVIDIA H100) of the Miyabi

supercomputer.


University of Tokyo.  Notice that the throughput is the product of (i) the number of MCMC steps
(or GFMC projections) executed per unit time by a single GPU multiplied by (ii) the number of
walkers assigned to that GPU.

    The  benchmark  calculations  were  performed  using  six  water  clusters:   H2O  (water, N                   e  =
8), (H2O)2  (water  dimerN                  e =16), (H    2O)4  (water  cluster  [4], N             e =32), (H    2O)6  (water
cluster  [6],N           e =48), (H    2O)10 (water  cluster  [8],N             e =64), and (H    2O)20 (water  cluster
[20],N              e =160). We used theccECPpseudopotentials accompanied with thecc-pVTZbasis set.
As  shown  in  Figs.  3  and  4,  performance  improves  monotonically  with  the  number  of  walkers
per GPU, up to a saturation point.  This saturation reflects the GPU becoming fully utilized, as
analyzed in the next Section,  and the corresponding walker count represents the most efficient
configuration for that system. Since the optimal number of walkers per GPU depends on both the
system size and hardware, users should perform preliminary benchmarking runs to identify the

                                                             45
FIG. 4.  The LRDMC throughput as a function of the number of walkers per GPU. The vertical axis rep-

resents GFMC projections×number of walkers per sec., which measures the actual computational power
of the QMC runs.  Each panel shows the four combinations of basis representation (spherical/cartesian

GTOs) and precision (full/mixed precision). The benchmark was performed for six systems, but only three

of them,water(N                             e =8),water  cluster  [8](N                    e =64), andwater  cluster  [20](N                         e =160), are
plotted here.  These benchmark tests were measured on a single Miyabi-G GPU node (NVIDIA H100) of

the Miyabi supercomputer.


performance sweet spot before large-scale production simulations.



X.    PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS ON NVIDIA GPU H100


   In Section IX, we observed the throughputs of MCMC and LRDMC as the number of walk-
ers increased,  but it was unclear to what extent the GPU was actually utilized.   Therefore,  we
used NVIDIA Nsight Systems and NVIDIA Nsight Compute to analyze how jQMC’s MCMC and
LRDMC computations run on the GH200 chip of Miyabi Supercomputer. For the benchmark sys-
tem, we used the water-cluster [8] (N  e=64) employed in Section IX.   Figure 5 shows a roofline

plot for the function that calculates atomic orbitals with Cartesian GTOs for a given batched elec-
tron positions (dim.  of input: (number of walkers,N        e, 3)→dim.  of output: (number of walkers,
number of AOs,N        e)), which is the most basic computational function in jQMC. The x-axis plots

                                                           46
the Arithmetic Intensity (AI), defined as floating-point operations (FLOPs) per byte, for the total
data transfer involving (a) L1 cache, (b) L2 cache, and (c) DRAM (HBM3).  In the roofline plot,
each dot represents a (fused) CUDA kernel generated via XLA for different numbers of walkers,
with wall time measured by NVIDIA Nsight Compute used to size the circles.  The plot reveals
that a single fused CUDA kernel dominates most of the AO computation. We focus on the kernel
hereafter. Up toN     w =2048, the achieved number of floating-point operations per second (FLOPS
or FLOP/s) increases as the number of walkers, resulting in the achieved FLOPS of 5.65 and the
AI of 817.32. The achieved FLOPS is about 22% of the peak FLOPS of the CUDA 64-bit kernel.
However, the achieved FLOPS are saturated afterN           w =2048, and the kernel point just shifts to the
left (i.e., the AI decreases) without increasing FLOPS. Finally, none of the CUDA kernels are on
the L1, L2, DRAM rooflines, even withN           w =32768.  NVIDIA Nsight Compute reveals that the
bottleneck is neither L1, L2, nor DRAM BW (i.e., the bytes/s sustained between the Streaming
Multiprocessors and each memory tier, as drawn by the roofline ceilings), but the L1 wavefront
pipe (i.e., the transactions/cycle throughput of the L1 load/store unit, which is distinct from its byte
BW when warp threads access non-contiguous addresses73).  Figure 6 plots, as a function ofN     w,
the achieved fraction of the peak of five quantities.  The dashed lines (L1 byte BW, L2 byte BW)
and the DRAM byte BW curve report the bytes/s delivered by the kernel normalized by the device-
peak BW of each level, which correspond to the ceilings of the hierarchical roofline of Fig. 5. The
two solid lines, in contrast, report a transaction-rate occupancy: L1 LSU (Load Store Unit) wave-
front pipe is the number of wavefronts/cycle issued through the L1 load/store data pipe normalized
by its peak, and L2 request pipe is the analogous quantity at the L2 boundary.  Figure 6 reveals
that the L1 LSU wavefront pipe reaches∼90% of peak forN                             w =2048, while L1 byte BW shows
plateaus near∼50%.  We notice that the∼40-point gap between the solid and the dashed red
curves is invisible on the byte-only roofline yet identifies the kernel as L1 transaction-throughput
bound rather than L1 BW bound.  The L2 request pipe stays at a lower absolute level (peaking
near∼48%), indicating that the L1 absorbing is most of the gather traffic. DRAM byte BW only
becomes appreciable at the largestN          w =32768, where the working set finally exceeds the on-chip
L1 and L2 caches.   These results suggest that cache optimizations will be necessary for future
improvements in FLOPS and AI performance. In addition, we analyzed each component, such as
continuum kinetic energy, discretized kinetic energy, and non-local ECP computations, which are
dominant in the computation of the local energy in MCMC and the projection in LRDMC. For
example, Figure 7 shows the roofline plot for the discretized kinetic energy computation (Eq. 21)

                                                         47
withN           w =2048. The plot shows that the dominant (fused) CUDA kernels are all in DRAM-bound
regions, suggesting that QMC calculations as a whole are also dominated by memory-bound op-
erations.   The bottleneck of each kernel depends on whether it is L1-,  L2-,  or DRAM-limited,
according to our Compute analysis with NVIDIA Nsight Compute, and the optimization must be
tailored to the specific circumstances.  The CUDA-kernel-level optimization (i.e., via high-level
operations (HLO) generated by JAX) for jQMC is an interesting future work.




















FIG. 5.  Hierarchical roofline of the functioncompute           AOs(Cartesian, FP64) kernel on H100, swept over

Nw∈32,128,1024,8192,32768, with the (a) L1, (b) L2, and (c) DRAM diagonals (peak BW 27.58, 10.48,
and 4.02 TB/s, respectively) and the 27.58-TFLOPS CUDA-core FP64 ceiling.  The L1, L2, and DRAM

BWs and the FP64 peak performance are based on NVIDIA Nsight Compute measurements; the measured

DRAM BW of 4.02 TB/s agrees well with the nominal Miyabi value of 4.02 TB/s. The FP64 horizontal line
reflects the actual clock (∼1.5 GHz) and is lower than the 33.5 TFLOPS H100 datasheet boost-clock peak.

These benchmark tests were measured on a single Miyabi-G GPU node (NVIDIA H100) of the Miyabi

supercomputer.




XI.    WALL-TIME BENCHMARK


   The walltime required in practice for MCMC and LRDMC calculations depends strongly on
the quality of the employed wave function, because the ultimate target of QMC simulations is the
statistical error bar, and the efficiency for reaching a given error bar is significantly affected by the
wave-function quality.  Since different QMC packages adopt different wave-function parameteri-

                                                          48
FIG. 6.  Achieved fraction of peak for the dominantcompute                   AOs(Cartesian, FP64) kernel, as a function
of walker countN            w on a single H100 GPU. Dashed lines (L1/L2 byte BW and DRAM byte BW report the

bytes-per-second utilization of each memory tier - the same quantities that set the ceilings of the hierarchical

roofline. Solid lines (L1 LSU wavefront pipe, L2 request pipe) report instead the transaction-rate occupancy
of each cache level’s issue pipe (wavefronts/cycle at L1, request packets/cycle at L2 cache), which is the

binding throughput for scatter/gather access patterns and is structurally absent from a byte-BW roofline.

This benchmark test was measured on a single Miyabi-G GPU node (NVIDIA H100) of the Miyabi super-
computer.



zations and different functional forms of the Jastrow factor, a fair comparison between packages is
generally difficult.  However, TurboRVB and jQMC use the same Jastrow factor, enabling a gen-
uinely fair comparison.  In this benchmark, we prepared exactly the same Jastrow–Slater ansatz
in both TurboRVB and jQMC, and compared the absolute wall-clock time required to achieve a
target statistical accuracy of 1 kcal/mol in the total energy for a given ansatz. Parameters related to
computational efficiency, such as the electron hopping distance used in the MCMC proposal, the
frequency of observable calculations in MCMC, and the lattice discretization mesh and projection
time in LRDMC, were set to the same values for both TurboRVB and jQMC.

    Benchmark  calculations  were  carried  out  for  six  systems  of  increasing  size:water(N                             e  =
8),water  dimer(N                        e  =16),water  cluster  [4](N                         e  =32),water  cluster  [6](N                         e  =

                                                              49
FIG. 7. Roofline plot of the CUDA kernels involved in the discretized kinetic-energy computation, executed
with 2048 walkers in FP64 on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU of the Miyabi supercomputer.  The horizontal

axis  is  the  AI  (FLOPs  per  byte  of  DRAM  traffic)  and  the  vertical  axis  is  the  achieved  performance  in

TFLOPS. Each gray marker represents one CUDA kernel;  its area is proportional to the NSYS-reported
wall-clock contribution, so the dominant (fused) kernels appear as the largest disks.  Yellow-filled markers

indicate the five kernels with the largest wall time. The orange diagonal line is the HBM-DRAM BW ceiling

(4.02 TB/s) and the black horizontal line is the peak CUDA-core FP64 throughput (27.7 TFLOPS); the red
cross marks the wall-clock-weighted average over all kernels (AI≈1.80, 2.77 TFLOPS). The DRAM BWs

and  the  FP64  peak  performance  are  based  on  NVIDIA  Nsight  Compute  measurements;  thus,  the  FP64

horizontal line reflects the actual clock (∼1.5 GHz) and is lower than the 33.5 TFLOPS H100 datasheet
boost-clock peak.


48),water  cluster  [8](N                     e  =64), andwater  cluster  [20](N                           e  =160).  All calculations
employed theccECPpseudopotentials together with thecc-pVTZbasis set.  For the determinant
part, we directly used the orbitals obtained from an LDA-PZ DFT calculation with PySCF-forge.
TurboRVB employs spherical GTOs, whereas jQMC supports both spherical and Cartesian GTOs.
Since the Cartesian representation is faster than the Spherical one in jQMC, we transformed the
orbitals from spherical to Cartesian form for the jQMC calculations;  the physical energy is, of
course, unchanged by this transformation.  For the Jastrow factor, we usedJ=J                 2 +J    3, whereJ               2
was of Pad´e type andJ         3 was expanded in localized atomic orbitals, using H:[3s1p] and O:[4s2p1d].

                                                             50
          TABLE IV. Compilation and runtime environments used in the benchmark calculations.
Code/platform   Environment

TurboRVB-CPU  Intel compiler (ifort, icc) 2021.10.0; Intel MKL 2023.2; Intel MPI 2021.10

TurboRVB-GPU nvfortran 23.9; CUDA 12.2.2; Open MPI 4.1.5; NVIDIA MPS (nvidia-cuda-mps-control)
jQMC-CPU         Python 3.12.7; JAX 0.7.2; Open MPI 4.1.6; mpi4py 4.1.1

jQMC-GPU         Python 3.12.7; JAX 0.7.2; Open MPI 4.1.6; mpi4py 4.1.1; CUDA 12.9


The variational parameters of the Jastrow factor were optimized in TurboRVB, and the resulting
values were copied into theJastrow            dataof jQMC. Using these wave functions, we computed
the total energy and variance with both TurboRVB and jQMC by MCMC, and confirmed that the
results agreed within the statistical error bars for all six systems.

   For these wave functions,  we prepared one node (equipped with two multi-core CPUs with
four GPUs) on the Genkai supercomputer, and measured the time required to achieve a statistical
error bar of 1 kcal/mol in two cases:  using CPUs only and using CPU+GPUs (TurboRVB) or
only  GPUs  (jQMC).  In  the  CPU-only  calculations,  both  TurboRVB  and  jQMC  used  120  MPI
processes, corresponding to the maximum number available of cores on a single node, with one
walker  assigned  to  each  MPI  process.   In  the  GPU  calculations  with  jQMC,  one  MPI  process
was bound to each GPU, and the number of walkers per MPI process was chosen to maximize
the MCMC and LRDMC throughput on the Genkai GPU node.  In contrast, TurboRVB does not
implement walker-level vectorization, unlike jQMC; instead, NVIDIA CUDA MPS was used74,
and 30 MPI processes (i.e., all cores in one NUMA domain, which is the optimal setting for the
CPU-bound part, despite possibly oversubscribing a single GPU) were assigned to each GPU. The
compilation and runtime environments are summarized in Table IV.

   Figure 8 shows the absolute node-seconds required to reach a statistical error bar of 1 kcal/mol
in the total energy for the systems listed above.  Focusing first on jQMC, one can clearly see that
GPU acceleration yields speedups exceeding two orders of magnitude, if compared with the same
calculations run on CPUs.  This is consistent with expectations, since JAX has been developed
with GPU execution in mind. By contrast, in TurboRVB, the GPU calculations are slower than the
CPU calculations for the system sizes and hardware configurations tested here.  This is because
TurboRVB does not parallelize at the walker level, as noted above, and only partially offloads the
computation to the GPU by replacing some matrix and vector operations (BLAS/LAPACK) with

                                                       51
cuBLAS and cuSolver routines.  In TurboRVB, the GPU version becomes more advantageous as
the system size increases because kernels replaced with cuBLAS and cuSolver are more dominant;
Fig. 8 demonstrates that for systems with roughlyN                   e∼100, GPU acceleration becomes clearly
beneficial, particularly in the LRDMC implementation.  We expect that for even larger systems,
the GPU version of TurboRVB will eventually be faster than the CPU one.

   Figure  8  also  shows  that  the  current  CPU  version  of  jQMC  is  about  10  times  slower  than
TurboRVB on the same CPU (Intel Xeon Platinum 8490H), even though jQMC implements es-
sentially the same algorithm to the best of our knowledge. This indicates that the current jQMC is
suboptimal on CPU via XLA. For instance, using hardware-counter measurements, we found that
JAX/XLA emits mostly scalar instructions in the AO kernel, with only a small amount of AVX2
and almost no AVX-512, even though the CPU supports them; forcing a 512-bit preferred vector
width does not change this, pointing to a code-structure rather than a flag issue.  After rewriting
the relevant part of the AO kernel, we obtained a speedup of a factor of 2 for the AO evaluation
(c.f., We did not merge this change because it made the GPU version slightly slower). In contrast,
a minimal Fortran/C implementation of the same operation, compiled with the Intel compiler, is
almost fully vectorized with AVX-512 and is much faster (about 6 times over the baseline) than
the JAX AO kernel. Beyond the AO kernel, there are most likely further CPU-side bottlenecks in
other kernels of jQMC, which we leave for future identification. The current jQMC layout is well
suited to GPU but remains suboptimal for CPU; a unified implementation that performs well on
both is left for future work.

   Comparing the two faster cases in each package, jQMC on GPUs with TurboRVB on CPUs,
jQMC is faster for both MCMC and LRDMC in the wall times,  thanks to GPUs.   The jQMC
MCMC and LRDMC are faster than the corresponding TurboRVB calculations by 10 times and 3
times, respectively, for the system sizes taken into account here. In the LRDMC calculations, the
speed-up offered by jQMC is not as drastic as that found in MCMC. This is because, in LRDMC,
the computational bottleneck involves a significant amount of AO evaluations, needed in the dis-
cretized kinetic energy and in the non-local ECP calculations, resulting in a performance gain that
are not as significant as those achieved with MCMC. Further acceleration is expected if AO cal-
culations can be made more optimal in jQMC. Nevertheless, the present benchmark demonstrates
that jQMC has already been tuned to deliver wall-clock performance comparable to, or even better
than, TurboRVB, despite the fact that TurboRVB is a long-optimized Fortran90 code benefiting

                                                       52
from Intel Fortran compiler optimizations.


























FIG. 8.  Wall-clock time (nodes·hours) required to obtain the target statistical error ofσ(E)=1 mHa,

as a function of the number of valence electronsN                    e, for (a) MCMC and (b) LRDMC sampling.  The wall-
clock time is estimated from a reference run viat       target  =(σ     run/σtarget)2·t net, wheret             net  refers to the net

elapsed time of the reference run excluding initialization and equilibration. jQMC runs use cartesian GTOs

in mixed precision; TurboRVB uses spherical GTOs in full precision. Solid lines are power-law fitst∝N            pe
with the exponentpgiven in the legend.  In the LRDMC calculations, a lattice discretizationa=0.3 Bohr

was employed.  These benchmark tests were measured on a single node (2×Intel Xeon Platinum 8490H

+4×NVIDIA H100) of the Genkai supercomputer.  In the CPU-only calculations, both TurboRVB and
jQMC used 120 MPI processes with one walker assigned to each MPI process.  In the GPU calculations

with jQMC, one MPI process was bound to each GPU and the number of walkers per MPI process was

chosen to maximize the MCMC and LRDMC throughput. In the TurboRVB calculation on GPUs, 30 MPI
processes were assigned to each GPU via NVIDIA CUDA MPS.




XII.    PARALLELIZATION STRATEGY: WEAK SCALING BENCHMARKS


    Although the vectorization scheme described above improves the throughput on a single GPU,
production QMC calculations often require simulations that exceed the capacity of a single device.

                                                            53
InjQMC, multi-GPU calculations are therefore supported by explicit MPI-based parallelization via
mpi4pyfor CPUs or by the sharding mechanisms provided byJAXfor GPUs.  We examined the
weak-scaling performance ofjQMCon the Miyabi and Leonardo supercomputers. The benchmark
target  is  the  water  cluster  (H2O)20  (N  e  =160).   In  these  benchmarks,  the  number  of  walkers
per  GPU  is  fixed  at  100,  while  the  number  of  GPUs  was  increased,  allowing  us  to  assess  the
implementation’s parallel efficiency in realistic multi-GPU settings.


   Figure 9 shows the weak-scaling benchmark results for (a) VMC (MCMC sampling+one step
of wave function optimization ) and (b) LRDMC. As seen, the weak-scaling behavior differs be-
tween VMC and LRDMC. In the VMC case [Fig. 9(a)], the performance initially improves as the
number of walkers increases, both on Miyabi and Leonardo. This improvement is attributed to the
faster convergence of the CG solver when the number of walkers per GPU, and hence the total
number of MCMC samples, is increased. With an even larger number of walkers, a slight degrada-
tion is observed on Miyabi, whereas the good weak-scaling performance is maintained up to 1024
GPUs on Leonardo.  The slowdown on Miyabi is likely due to network latency and/or hardware-
induced GPU-to-GPU performance variability across different GPUs, which has not yet been iden-
tified.  Nevertheless, the weak-scaling efficiency remains close to unity on Miyabi (1.02), while
Leonardo maintains good performance (0.92) up to 1024 GPUs, corresponding to 102,400 walk-
ers. In the LRDMC case [Fig. 9(b)], the slowdown is observed as the number of walkers increases
on both Miyabi and Leonardo.   This behavior is expected since LRDMC requires inter-walker
communication between two consecutive branching steps, as described in Sec. II B 2.  Here, we
compare two branching schemes for LRDMC: the conventional algorithm38 and the load-balanced
algorithm75.  As expected,  the load-balanced algorithm shows better weak-scaling performance
than the conventional one on both Miyabi and Leonardo,  because it is specifically designed to
balance the computational workload among walkers75. Both LRDMC algorithms maintain perfor-
mance close to unity up to 512 GPUs on Miyabi and 256 GPUs on Leonardo. A more pronounced
degradation is observed at 1024 GPUs on Miyabi and 512 GPUs on Leonardo, likely again due
to network latency and/or hardware-induced GPU-to-GPU performance variability. Nevertheless,
the load-balanced LRDMC algorithm still achieves good weak-scaling performance, with values
of∼1.2 on Miyabi and∼1.1 on Leonardo, for the largest calculations considered, corresponding
to 102,400 walkers. These benchmarks demonstrate that the MPI- and GPU-parallel implementa-
tion introduces only a small overhead over the present range of system sizes, both for VMC and

                                                       54
LRDMC.




























FIG. 9.  Weak-scaling benchmark.  Elapsed time per (a) VMC step (MCMC sampling+one step of WF

optimization) and (b) LRDMC branching step, normalized to the value obtained with 8 GPUs on each ma-
chine.  Error bars show the min–max range across 2-5 independent runs on different node allocations.  The

benchmark target is a water cluster (H2O)20 (N  e =160).  The number of walkers per GPU is fixed at 100,

so the total walker count (top axis) scales linearly with the number of GPUs (bottom axis); this corresponds
to the standard weak-scaling protocol in which the workload per GPU is held constant.  For LRDMC, two

branching schemes are compared:  the conventional (GFMC                  tauclass) algorithm (filled markers) and the

load-balanced (GFMC       braclass) algorithm (open markers), where the latter applies a fixed number of pro-
jections per measurement chosen from the conventional LRDMC withτ=0.1 a.u.     −1  . The horizontal dashed

line indicates ideal weak scaling (=1.0). Miyabi (green squares; NVIDIA H100 nodes at the University of

Tokyo) was scanned from 8 to 1024 GPUs, and Leonardo (black triangles; NVIDIA A100 Booster module
at CINECA) from 8 up to 1024 GPUs.  Both VMC and LRDMC retain near-ideal weak scaling across the

full range tested, demonstrating that jQMC sustains its parallel efficiency up to 10       3 GPUs.







                                                             55
XIII.    VERIFICATION OF THE CODE


A.    Intra-software tests

   Theintra-software testsin jQMC are designed according to the following principle.  Achiev-
ing high computational performance with JAX requiresjitcompilation andvmapvectorization.
They may obscure the underlying algorithmic flow and make it more difficult to debug the code
than conventional Python implementations.   To address the trade-offbetween performance and
maintainability,  jQMC  adopts  a  dual-implementation  strategy.   More  specifically,  for  the  main
functions, two versions are implemented in parallel:  a production version without a suffix and a
corresponding debug version with the suffix           debug. The production version is used for production
calculations and is highly optimized for performance. By contrast, the                  debugversion prioritizes
readability by using standard Python constructs, allowing users and developers to follow the logic
step by step.  Then, to ensure correctness, we implement consistency tests for as many function
pairs as possible. These tests verify that the production and debug implementations produce equiv-
alent results.  The CD/CI framework on GitHub triggerspytestevery time a change is pushed
or nightly.  Every Python module is accompanied by a corresponding test Python module.  For
example,test       wavefunction.pycontains comprehensive tests for the dataclasses and associ-
ated functions defined inwavefunction.py. These tests help reduce the risk of introducing bugs,
thereby improving the maintainability and reliability of jQMC.


B.    Inter-software tests

   In the QMC community, recent efforts have been made to systematically examine reproducibil-
ity across multiple codes76. One notable study involved 11 different community-developed QMC
codes and focused on computing the total energy and binding energy of the water–methane dimer.
These calculations were performed using a common basis set (cc-pVTZ) and a common pseudopo-
tential (ccECP), allowing a controlled investigation of reproducibility across implementations.  In
DMC calculations employing ECPs, one of the technical challenges is how to deal with the non-
local part of the ECP. Approaches such as the Locality Approximation (LA) and T-move (TM)
are known to affect the zero-time-step (t→0) limit.  This is due not only to the non-local part
treatment, but also to the amplitude of the wave function, set by the Jastrow factor.  As a result,
differences in Jastrow implementations among codes can lead to discrepancies in energies. On the

                                                        56
FIG. 10.   The total energy of Methane,  Water,  and Methane-Water dimer,  and the binding energy.   The

CASINO, QMCPACK, and CMQMC results are taken from Ref. 76. The TurboRVB values are taken from

Ref. 49. The corresponding numbers are shown in Table V.


other hand, the Determinant Locality Approximation (DLA) and DLA combined with TM (DTM)
yield significantly better agreement among codes, as it minimizes sensitivity to the specific form
of the Jastrow factor in the small-tor small-alimits.  We carry out calculations analogous to the
consistency test in the aforementioned reproducibility study corresponding to the DTM locality
approximation (i.e., we used LRDMC with DLA) to assess the consistency of our implementa-
tion. We present our validation results in Fig. 10 and Table. V.



XIV.    DEMONSTRATIONS: VMC AND LRDMC ATOMIC FORCES WITH
OPTIMIZED JSD ANSATZ


   Recently,  the quantitative disagreement between CCSD(T)77  and FN-DMC with a Jastrow–
Slater determinant ansatz has been actively discussed. In particular, since the report of discrepan-
cies of up to about 8 kcal/mol for the binding energies of dispersion-dominated systems, such as
C60 encapsulated in a [6]cycloparaphenyleneacetylene ring (C60+5PPA), reported by Al-Hamdani
and co-workers78, the origin of these discrepancies has been debated from both the CCSD(T) and
DMC perspectives79–81.  Beyond total energies, first derivatives, namely atomic forces, have also
been examined.  For the same molecular structures, Slootmanet al.computed the differences be-
tween CCSD(T) and FN-DMC forces for ethanol82.  They reported that, for ethanol, DMC forces
agree  with  all-electron  CCSD(T)  within  a  mean  absolute  error  (MAE)  of  1.5  kcal  mol−1   Å−1  ,

                                                       57
even when the Reynolds approximation is employed (Eq. 103).  In the present work, we extend
this comparison by performing LRDMC force calculations for ethanol and malonaldehyde, both
included in the rMD17 set83,84, and assessing their agreement with CCSD(T).

   As in Ref. 85, we selected ethanol and malonaldehyde from the rMD17 dataset83,84, and com-
puted (i) VMC forces with fully optimized wave functions, (ii) LRDMC forces using trial wave
functions fully optimized at the VMC level, (iii) Hartree–Fock (HF), second-order Møller–Plesset
perturbation theory (MP2), CCSD, and DFT forces, and (iv) CCSD(T) forces as references.  We
extracted  50  structures  for  each  molecule  from  the  rMD17  dataset83,84.   We  employed  the  cc-
pVQZ basis set for the HF, MP286, and CCSD87, and CCSD(T) calculations. We employed def2-
QZVPPD88 basis set for DFT calculations with the SVWN89, PBE90, B3LYP91, PBE0+D3BJ                  92,
orωB97M+D3BJ                            93,94  functionals.  In the MP2, CCSD, and CCSD(T) calculations, the 1score
orbitals were kept frozen. The HF, DFT, MP2, CCSD, and CCSD(T) calculations were performed
using the Psi4 software suite (version 1.9.1)95.  For the VMC and LRDMC calculations, we used
ccECP96 together with the corresponding cc-pVTZ basis sets.  The MO coefficients in the Slater
determinant and the parameters in the Jastrow factor were optimized variationally at the VMC
level.  The Jastrow factor included inhomogeneous one-body (Eq. 29),  two-body (Eq. 32),  and
three-body (Eq. 35) terms.   For the basis sets of the inhomogeneous one-body and three-body
Jastrow terms, we used uncontracted primitive GTOs with [3s1p] for H and [4s2p1d] for C, N,
and O. The Gaussian exponents were optimized for each configuration during the wave-function
optimization.  The total numbers of optimized variational parameters were 38233 and 54749 for
ethanol and malonaldehyde, respectively.  The trial wave functions were generated with PySCF-
forge71.

   To compare the methods considered here, we computed the pairwise MAEs between their force
predictions and displayed them as a heat map in Fig. 11. The computed VMC and LRDMC forces
carry statistical errors. Suppose that the error bar of each force component is an independent Gaus-
sian random variable,ε                  i,I ∼N(0,σ          2i,I  ), whereiandIdenote sample index and force component.
Since the MAE is computed using|d              i,I|≡|∆F     i,I  +ε    i,I|, the measured MAE is always biased by the
statistical errors. Indeed, even when the two methods agree exactly (∆F      i,I   =0), the obtained MAE
does not vanish but reaches a floor,                                r
                                        MAEfloor =E[|ε           i,I|]=2
                                                                       π⟨σ  i,I⟩,                                          (159)
where the brackets denote the average over all samples and force components.  Notice thatσ         i,I   =

                                                          58
FIG. 11. Pairwise MAEs of atomic forces (kcal mol−1   Å−1  ) between all pairs of the benchmarked methods

for (a) Ethanol and (b) Malonaldehyde. The numbers indicate the corresponding MAEs for each pair. The

molecular structures were depicted using VESTA97.


TABLE V.   The total energies (Ha) of the Methane,  Water,  and Methane-Water,  and its binding energy
(meV), obtained with the extrapolation toτ→0 (DMC) anda→0 (LRDMC). The CASINO, QMCPACK,

and CMQMC results are taken from Ref.76. The TurboRVB values are taken from Ref. 49.
Package                                      Methane (Ha)   Water (Ha)   Methane–Water (Ha)              Binding energy (meV)

CASINO (DMC)                                   -8.07856(1)   -17.23473(2)        -25.31432(3)                    -26.8(1.0)
QMCPACK (DMC)                                  -8.07858(2)   -17.23482(3)        -25.31443(7)                    -29.0(1.1)

CMQMC (DMC)                                    -8.07848(2)   -17.23460(1)        -25.31411(3)                     -27.8(3)

TurboRVB (Conventional LRDMC)                  -8.07860(1)   -17.23479(1)        -25.31445(1)                     -28.1(3)

TurboRVB (Load-balanced LRDMC)                 -8.07862(2)   -17.23482(2)        -25.31447(2)                     -29.0(7)

jQMC (Conventional LRDMC)                      -8.07867(2)   -17.23478(2)        -25.31444(4)                     -28.3(8)
jQMC (Load-balancing LRDMC)                    -8.07870(2)   -17.23477(2)        -25.31452(4)                     -27.9(8)


[(σ    Ai,I  )2 +(σ      Bi,I  )2]1/2    when both methods are stochastic and independent. In the present calculations,
the MAE floors are 0.35 and 0.72 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for VMC and LRDMC in ethanol, respectively
(0.82 kcal mol−1   Å−1   when VMC is compared with LRDMC), and 0.33 and 1.13 kcal mol−1   Å−1

                                                           59
in malonaldehyde, repectively (1.20 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for VMC vs LRDMC). Unless the measured
MAE clearly exceeds this floor, we cannot conclude that there is a genuine difference between the
two methods.



   For ethanol, Slootmanet al.                       82 reported a benchmark result for 200 configurations.  Their cal-
culation yielded an MAE of 3.055 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for VMC forces, with respect to the CCSD(T)
values taken as reference.  Our MAE on VMC forces for ethanol, (2.5 kcal mol−1  ) in MAE, is
lower than theirs, likely because of the more flexible Jastrow factor used in the present study. We
note, however, that our ethanol configurations are not identical to theirs and MAEs have the uncer-
tainty as noted above, so this is not a strict one-to-one comparison. Slootmanet al.also reported
an MAE of 2.0 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for DMC forces evaluated with the Reynolds approximation.  In
our calculations, we obtained a similar MAE of 2.1 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for ethanol, which is close to
the value reported by Slootmanet al.



   For malonaldehyde, one of the authors of the present study previously reported a large discrep-
ancy between VMC and CCSD(T) forces in Ref. 85, amounting to 7.2 kcal mol−1   Å−1   in RMSE
(4.8 kcal mol−1   Å−1   in MAE). We reproduce the same inconsistency in the present study, obtaining
an MAE of 5.8 kcal mol−1   Å−1   for the MCMC forces.  The obtained MAE differs from the value
reported in Ref. 85 by 1 kcal mol−1   Å−1  .  We attribute the difference mainly to variations in the
trial wave functions employed in the two calculations.  In this study, jQMC uses the exponential
form for the two-body Jastrow factor, whereas the previous work uses the Pad´e form.  In addi-
tion, the trial wave functions were generated using different XC functionals, namely B3LYP and
LDA-PZ in the present and previous works, respectively. Finally, the GTOs used in the three-body
Jastrow factor also differ between the two calculations, namely, Cartesian and Spherical GTOs,
respectively (i.e., the number ofdorbitals are different).



   Interestingly, even LRDMC shows a large discrepancy relative to CCSD(T), with an MAE of
5.2 kcal mol−1   Å−1  . Since the trial wave function, including its nodal surface, was optimized at the
VMC level, the mean-field nodal surface is unlikely to be the primary origin of the discrepancy.
The reason for the significant deviation in malonaldehyde is not yet fully understood and will
require further investigation from both the DMC and CCSD(T) perspectives.

                                                         60
XV.    CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES


   In  this  work,  we  presented  the  implementation  details  and  benchmark  results  of  jQMC,  a
Python-basedab initioquantum Monte Carlo (QMC) package built on top of JAX. jQMC is de-
signed  with  modern  heterogeneous  high-performance  computing  (HPC)  architectures  in  mind,
particularly those combining CPUs and GPUs, which are rapidly becoming mainstream. The code
is  parallelized  at  the  top  level  of  QMC  algorithms,  i.e.,  based  on  a  multi-walker  strategy.   By
packing as many walkers as GPU memory permits,  jQMC fully leverages GPU computational
power, leading to significant acceleration of QMC simulations.  Benchmark results confirm the
effectiveness of this design.

   jQMC remains under active development, and several important directions can be envisaged.
From a physics perspective, the implementation of periodic boundary conditions is a major mile-
stone for future work, which is in progress and will be most likely supported in the next release.
From a performance point of view, improving cache and memory efficiencies is an urgent chal-
lenge. While future hardware advancements may alleviate this issue, software-level solutions will
also be essential.



XVI.    CODE AND DATA AVAILABILITY


   The code and data that support the findings of this study are available from GitHub repositories
[https://github.com/jqmc-project/jQMC]  and  [https://github.com/jqmc-project/
jQMC-data],  respectively.   All  calculations  in  this  work  were  performed  using  jQMC  version
corresponding to v0.2.2.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


   K.N. is grateful for computational resources from the Numerical Materials Simulator at Na-
tional Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), from Research Institute for Information Technol-
ogy at Kyushu University under the category of General Projects on the supercomputer Genkai,
from  Information  technology  center  at  the  University  of  Tokyo  under  the  category  of  Regular
Use Projects on the supercomputer Miyabi.  The weak-scaling benchmark on Miyabi with more
than 512 GPUs was conducted through ”Large-scale HPC Challenge” Project, Joint Center for

                                                       61
Advanced High Performance Computing (JCAHPC). M.C. and K.N. acknowledge EuroHPC for
the computational grant EUHPC          B35    064 allocated on the Leonardo booster partition through the
EuroHPC Benchmark Access Call.
   K.N. acknowledges financial support from the MEXT Leading Initiative for Excellent Young
Researchers (Grant No. JPMXS0320220025) and from Japan Science and Technology Agency
(JST), PRESTO (Grant No. JPMJPR24J9).  M.C. acknowledges financial support from the Eu-
ropean  High  Performance  Computing  Joint  Undertaking  (JU)  through  the  ”EU-Japan  Alliance
in HPC” HANAMI project (Hpc AlliaNce for Applications and supercoMputing Innovation:  the
Europe - Japan collaboration).
   The authors acknowledge technical support of CINECA, especially grateful to Dr. Tommaso
Gorni (CINECA) and Dr. Laura Bellentani (CINECA) for their assistance. The authors gratefully
acknowledge fruitful discussions with our collaborators, especially Prof. Giuseppe Carleo (EPFL)
and Prof. Filippo Vicentini (Ecole Polytechnique), on the JAX implementation and its application
toab initioQMC. The authors thank Dr.  Tan Naruhiko and Dr.  Shinnosuke Furuya of NVIDIA
for  carefully  reading  Sec.  X  and  providing  valuable  suggestions  for  improving  the  clarity  and
wording.  K.N. acknowledges Dr.  Atsushi Togo (NIMS) for fruitful discussions on the high-level
design and software architecture of the package.
   Claude-code  (Anthropic)  and  Copilot  (Microsoft)  were  used  to  support  code  development,
specifically  for  performance  tuning  and  memory-efficiency  optimization  on  GPUs.    The  AI-
generated parts were critically tested and reviewed by K.N.



REFERENCES


1R. M. Martin,Electronic structure : basic theory and practical methods(Cambridge University

  Press, 2004).

2M. G. Medvedev, I. S. Bushmarinov, J. Sun, J. P. Perdew,  and K. A. Lyssenko, Science355, 49

  (2017).

3W. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. Needs,  and G. Rajagopal, Rev. Mod. Phys.73, 33 (2001).

4F. Becca and S. Sorella,Quantum Monte Carlo approaches for correlated systems(Cambridge

  University Press, 2017).

5N. Metropolis and S. Ulam, J. Am. Stat. Assoc.44, 335 (1949).

6D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett.45, 566 (1980).

                                                       62
 7D. Ceperley, J. Stat. Phys.43, 815 (1986).

 8R. J. Needs,  M. D. Towler,  N. D. Drummond,   and P. L. R´ıos, J. Phys. Condens. Matter22,

  023201 (2009).

 9R. Needs, M. Towler, N. Drummond, P. L´opez R´ıos,   and J. Trail, J. Chem. Phys.152(2020),

  10.1063/1.5144288.

10R. Shinde, E. J. Landinez Borda, S. Shepard, E. Slootman, A. Cuzzocrea, V. Azizi, P. Lopez-

  Tarifa, N. Renaud, C. Umrigar, S. Moroni,  and C. Filippi, “Cornell-Holland Ab-initio Materials
  Package (CHAMP-EU) v2.3.0,”  (2024).

11T.  A.  Anderson,  C.  Filippi,  F.  R.  Petruziello,  A.  D.  G”ucl”u,  J.  Toulouse,   and  C.  J.  Umri-

  gar, “Cornell-Holland Ab-Initio Materials Package (CHAMP-US),”  (2024),https://github.
  com/QMC-Cornell/CHAMP; accessed 2026-06-10.

12W. A. Wheeler, S. Pathak, K. G. Kleiner, S. Yuan, J. N. B. Rodrigues, C. Lorsung, K. Krongchon,

  Y. Chang, Y. Zhou, B. Busemeyer, K. T. Williams, A. Mu˜noz, C. Y. Chow,  and L. K. Wagner, J.
  Chem. Phys.158, 114801 (2023).

13A. Scemama, M. Caffarel, E. Oseret,  and W. Jalby, J. Comput. Chem.34, 938 (2013).

14J. Kim, A. D. Baczewski, T. D. Beaudet, A. Benali, M. C. Bennett, M. A. Berrill, N. S. Blunt,

  E. J. L. Borda, M. Casula, D. M. Ceperley, S. Chiesa, B. K. Clark, R. C. Clay, K. T. Delaney,
  M. Dewing, K. P. Esler, H. Hao, O. Heinonen, P. R. C. Kent, J. T. Krogel, I. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a, Y. W.
  Li, M. G. Lopez, Y. Luo, F. D. Malone, R. M. Martin, A. Mathuriya, J. McMinis, C. A. Melton,
  L. Mitas, M. A. Morales, E. Neuscamman, W. D. Parker, S. D. P. Flores, N. A. Romero, B. M.
  Rubenstein, J. A. R. Shea, H. Shin, L. Shulenburger, A. F. Tillack, J. P. Townsend, N. M. Tubman,
  B. V. D. Goetz, J. E. Vincent, D. C. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang,  and L. Zhao, J. Phys. Condens.
  Matter30, 195901 (2018).

15P. R. Kent, A. Annaberdiyev, A. Benali, M. C. Bennett, E. J. Landinez Borda, P. Doak, H. Hao,

  K. D. Jordan,  J. T. Krogel,  I. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a,  J. Lee,  Y. Luo,  F. D. Malone,  C. A. Melton,  L. Mi-
  tas, M. A. Morales, E. Neuscamman, F. A. Reboredo, B. Rubenstein, K. Saritas, S. Upadhyay,
  G. Wang, S. Zhang,  and L. Zhao, J. Chem. Phys.152, 174105 (2020).

16M. Barborini, J. Charry, M. Ditte, A. Leventis, G. Kafanas,  and A. Tkatchenko, J. Chem. Phys.

  164, 062501 (2026).

17L. K. Wagner, M. Bajdich,  and L. Mitas, J. Comput. Phys.228, 3390 (2009).

18K.  Nakano,  C.  Attaccalite,  M.  Barborini,  L.  Capriotti,  M.  Casula,  E.  Coccia,  M.  Dagrada,

  C. Genovese, Y. Luo, G. Mazzola, A. Zen,  and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.152, 204121 (2020).

                                                         63
19K. Nakano, O. Kohul´ak, A. Raghav, M. Casula,   and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.159, 224801

  (2023).

20E. Posenitskiy, V. G. Chilkuri, A. Ammar, M. Hapka, K. Pernal, R. Shinde, E. J. Landinez Borda,

  C.  Filippi,  K.  Nakano,  O.  Kohul´ak,  S.  Sorella,  P.  de  Oliveira  Castro,  W.  Jalby,  P.  L.  R´ıos,
  A. Alavi,  and A. Scemama, J. Chem. Phys.158, 174801 (2023).

21E. Slootman, V. G. Chilkuri, A. Delval, M. Hoffer, T. Gorni, F. Coppens, J. van de Nes, R. L.

  Panad´es-Barrueta,  E. Posenitskiy,  A. Ammar,  E. J. Landinez Borda,  K. Camus,  O. Kohul`ak,
  E. Giner, P. de Oliveira Castro, C. Valensi, W. Jalby, C. Filippi,   and A. Scemama, J. Chem.
  Phys.164, 112501 (2026).

22R. Shinde, C. Filippi, A. Scemama,  and W. Jalby, Nat. Rev. Phys.7, 378–387 (2025).

23E. Strohmaier, H. W. Meuer, J. Dongarra,  and H. D. Simon, Computer48, 42 (2015).

24TOP500.org, “TOP500,”https://top500.org, [Online; accessed 10-Jun.-2026].

25M. Sato, Y. Kodama, M. Tsuji,  and T. Odajima, IEEE Micro42, 26 (2022).

26S. Wienke, P. Springer, C. Terboven,   and D. an Mey, inEuro-Par 2012 Parallel Processing,

  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 7484 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012) pp. 859–
  870.

27H. C. Edwards, C. R. Trott,  and D. Sunderland, J. Parallel Distrib. Comput.74, 3202 (2014).

28C.  R.  Trott,  D.  Lebrun-Grandi’e,  D.  Arndt,  J.  Ciesko,  V.  Dang,  N.  Ellingwood,  R.  Gayatri,

  E. Harvey, D. S. Hollman, D. Ibanez, N. Liber, J. Madsen, J. Miles, D. Poliakoff, A. Powell,
  S. Rajamanickam, M. Simberg, D. Sunderland, B. Turcksin,  and J. Wilke, IEEE Trans. Parallel
  Distrib. Syst.33, 805 (2022).

29M.  Abadi,  A.  Agarwal,  P.  Barham,  E.  Brevdo,  Z.  Chen,  C.  Citro,  G.  S.  Corrado,  A.  Davis,

  J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Joze-
  fowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´e, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah,
  M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasude-
  van, F. Vi´egas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu,  and X. Zheng, “Ten-
  sorFlow:  Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,”  (2015), software available
  from tensorflow.org.

30A.  Paszke,  S.  Gross,  F.  Massa,  A.  Lerer,  J.  Bradbury,  G.  Chanan,  T.  Killeen,  Z.  Lin,

  N.  Gimelshein,  L.  Antiga,  A.  Desmaison,  A.  K¨opf,  E.  Yang,  Z.  DeVito,  M.  Raison,  A.  Te-
  jani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai,  and S. Chintala, “Pytorch: an imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library,” inProceedings of the 33rd International Conference on

                                                         64
  Neural Information Processing Systems(Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019).

31J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, Y. Katariya, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Nec-

  ula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne,  and Q. Zhang, “JAX: composable transfor-
  mations of Python+NumPy programs,”  (2018).

32D. Pfau, J. Spencer, A. de G. Matthews,  and W. Foulkes, Phys. Rev. Research2, 033429 (2020).

33J. Hermann, Z. Sch¨atzle,  and F. No´e, Nat. Chem.12, 891 (2020).

34N. Renaud, JOSS8, 5472 (2023).

35W. Ren, W. Fu, X. Wu,  and J. Chen, Nat. Commun.14, 1860 (2023).

36M. Casula and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.119, 6500 (2003).

37S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. Lett.80, 4558 (1998).

38M. Casula, C. Filippi,  and S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. Lett.95, 100201 (2005).

39S. Sorella and L. Capriotti, J. Chem. Phys.133(2010), 10.1063/1.3516208.

40M. Rogowski, S. Aseeri, D. Keyes,  and L. Dalcin, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.34, 611

  (2023).

41N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller,  and E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys.

  21, 1087 (1953).

42W. K. Hastings, Biometrika57, 97 (1970).

43C. Attaccalite and S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. Lett.100, 114501 (2008).

44D. F. Ten Haaf, H. J. Van Bemmel, J. M. Van Leeuwen, W. Van Saarloos,  and D. M. Ceperley,

  Phys. Rev. B51, 13039 (1995).

45M. Calandra Buonaura and S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. B57, 11446 (1998).

46S. Sorella and L. Capriotti, Phys. Rev. B61, 2599 (2000).

47M. Casula,New QMC approaches for the simulation of electronic systems: a first application to

  aromatic molecules and transition metal compounds, Ph.D. thesis, SISSA (2005).

48K. Nakano, R. Maezono,  and S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. B101, 155106 (2020).

49K. Nakano, S. Sorella,  and M. Casula, J. Chem. Phys.163, 194117 (2025).

50T. Kato, Commun. Pure Appl. Math.10, 151 (1957).

51T. McDaniel,  E. F. D’Azevedo,  Y. W. Li,  K. Wong,   and P. R. C. Kent, J. Chem. Phys.147,

  174107 (2017).

52K. Gottfried and T.-M. Yan,Quantum mechanics: fundamentals. 2nd edition(Springer, 2003).

53L. Mit´aˇs, E. L. Shirley,  and D. M. Ceperley, J. Chem. Phys.95, 3467 (1991).

54M. Casula, Phys. Rev. B74, 161102 (2006).


                                                         65
55A. Zen, J. G. Brandenburg, A. Michaelides,  and D. Alf`e, J. Chem. Phys.151, 134105 (2019).

56C. Umrigar, Int. J. Quantum Chem36, 217 (1989).

57K. Nakano, A. Raghav,  and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.156, 034101 (2022).

58P. Reynolds, R. Barnett, B. Hammond, R. Grimes,  and W. Lester Jr, Int. J. Quantum Chem.29,

  589 (1986).

59S. Pathak and L. K. Wagner, AIP Adv.10, 085213 (2020).

60C. J. Umrigar, J. Toulouse, C. Filippi, S. Sorella,  and R. G. Hennig, Phys. Rev. Lett.98, 110201

  (2007).

61J. Toulouse and C. J. Umrigar, J. Chem. Phys.126, 084102 (2007).

62S. Sorella, M. Casula,  and D. Rocca, J. Chem. Phys.127, 014105 (2007).

63G. Mazzola, A. Zen,  and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.137, 134112 (2012).

64S.-I. Amari, Neural Comput.10, 251 (1998).

65R. Rende, L. L. Viteritti, L. Bardone, F. Becca,  and S. Goldt, Commun. Phys.7, 260 (2024).

66H. V. Henderson and S. R. Searle, SIAM Review23, 53 (1981).

67K. B. Petersen and M. S. Pedersen, “The matrix cookbook,”  (2012), version 20121115.

68S. Sorella, Phys. Rev. B71, 241103 (2005).

69M. Marchi, S. Azadi, M. Casula,  and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys.131, 154116 (2009).

70N. Dupuy, S. Bouaouli, F. Mauri, S. Sorella,  and M. Casula, J. Chem. Phys.142, 214109 (2015).

71Q. Sun, M. R. Hermes, X. Wu, H. Zhai, X. Zhang, A. M. Ahmed, J. J. Aucar, O. J. Backhouse,

  S. Banerjee, P. Bao, N. A. Bogdanov, K. Bystrom, F. Chapoton, N.-Y. Chen, I. Y. Chernyshov,
  H. S. Clifford, S. Cohen-Janes, Z.-H. Cui, Y. D. Damour, N. Dattani, L. B. Dittmer, S. Ehlert,
  J. J. Eriksen, F. A. Evangelista, S. A. Ewing, A. Farahvash, K. Focke, Y. Gao, K. E. Gasperich,
  N. Gillispie, J. Greiner, M. R. Hennefarth, J. Hermann, C. Hillenbrand, J. Huhtasalo, B. Ibrahim,
  B. Jangid, A. N. Javaremi, A. J. Jenkins, Y. Jin, D. S. King, D. P. Kooi, J. S. Kurian, H. R. Lars-
  son, B. T. G. Lau, S. Lee, S. Lehtola, C. Li, H. Li, J. Li, R. Li, S. Li, A. O. Lykhin, A. Mahajan,
  N. Mauger, P. del Mazo-Sevillano, J. Moussa, K. Nakano, V. A. Neufeld, L. Peng, H. Q. Pham,
  P. Pinski, P. Pokhilko, Z. Pu, Y. Qian, S. J. Quiton, W. T. Schulze, T. R. Scott, A. Seal, J. D.
  Serna, J. E. T. Smith, K. E. Smyser, T. Stahl, C. Sun, K. J. Sung, E. Trushin, S. Upadhyay, E. A.
  Vo, T. Vogels, S. Wang, T. Wang, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Williamson, J. Yang, H.-Z.
  Ye, C.-N. Yeh, H. Yu, J. Yu, V. W. zhe Yu, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Zhou, A. J.
  Zhu, T. Zhu, T. C. Berkelbach, L. Gagliardi, S. Sharma, A. Sokolov,  and G. K.-L. Chan, “The
  python simulations of chemistry framework:  10 years of an open-source quantum chemistry

                                                         66
  project,”  (2026), arXiv:2603.14155 [physics.chem-ph].

72NVIDIA  Corporation,CUDA  Math  API  Reference  Manual:   Single  Precision  Mathematical

  Functions, NVIDIA Corporation (2026), version 13.2; accessed 19 May 2026.

73NVIDIA Corporation,NVIDIA Nsight Compute Profiling Guide(2026), sections “Quantities”

  and “Memory Tables: L1/TEX Cache”.

74L.  Bellentani,  M.  Casula,    and  T.  Gorni,Maximizing  GPU  utilization  with  NVIDIA  Multi-

  Process-Service  for  Quantum  Monte  Carlo  simulations  with  the  TurboRVB  code,  EPICURE
  White Paper EPICURE-WP-2025-001 (EPICURE, 2026).

75K. Nakano, S. Sorella,  and M. Casula, J. Chem. Phys.163, 194117 (2025).

76F. Della Pia, B. X. Shi, Y. S. Al-Hamdani, D. Alf´e, T. A. Anderson, M. Barborini, A. Benali,

  M. Casula, N. D. Drummond, M. Dubeck´y, C. Filippi, P. R. C. Kent, J. T. Krogel, P. L´opez R´ıos,
  A. L¨uchow, Y. Luo, A. Michaelides, L. Mitas, K. Nakano, R. J. Needs, M. C. Per, A. Scemama,
  J. Schultze, R. Shinde, E. Slootman, S. Sorella, A. Tkatchenko, M. Towler, C. J. Umrigar, L. K.
  Wagner, W. A. Wheeler, H. Zhou,  and A. Zen, J. Chem. Phys.163, 104110 (2025).

77K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople,  and M. Head-Gordon, Chem. Phys. Lett.157, 479

  (1989).

78Y.  S.  Al-Hamdani,  P.  R.  Nagy,  A.  Zen,  D.  Barton,  M.  K´allay,  J.  G.  Brandenburg,    and

  A. Tkatchenko, Nat. Commun.12, 3927 (2021).

79V. Fishman, M. Lesiuk, J. M. L. Martin,  and A. Daniel Boese, J. Chem. Theory and Comput.

  21, 2311 (2025).

80B. X. Shi, F. Della Pia, Y. S. Al-Hamdani, A. Michaelides, D. Alf`e,  and A. Zen, J. Chem. Phys.

  162, 144107 (2025).

81K. Nakano, B. X. Shi, D. Alf`e,  and A. Zen, “Assessing the impact of nodal surface optimization

  in fixed-node diffusion monte carlo on non-covalent interactions,”   (2026), arXiv:2604.04329
  [physics.chem-ph].

82E. Slootman, I. Poltavsky, R. Shinde, J. Cocomello, S. Moroni, A. Tkatchenko,  and C. Filippi,

  J. Chem. Theory Comput.20, 6020 (2024).

83A. S. Christensen and O. A. von Lilienfeld, Mach. learn.: sci. technol.1, 045018 (2020).

84A. S. Christensen and O. A. von Lilienfeld, “Revised md17 dataset (rmd17),”  (2020).

85K. Nakano, S. Battaglia,  and J. Hutter, J. Chem. Phys.164, 124113 (2026).

86C. Møller and M. S. Plesset, Phys. Rev.46, 618 (1934).

87I. Purvis, George D. and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys.76, 1910 (1982).


                                                        67
88F. Weigend and R. Ahlrichs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.7, 3297 (2005).

89S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk,  and M. Nusair, Can. J. Phys.58, 1200 (1980).

90J. P. Perdew, K. Burke,  and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett.77, 3865 (1996).

91P. J. Stephens,  F. J. Devlin,  C. F. Chabalowski,   and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem.98, 11623

  (1994).

92C. Adamo and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys.110, 6158 (1999).

93N. Mardirossian and M. Head-Gordon, J. Chem. Phys.144, 214110 (2016).

94A. Najibi and L. Goerigk, J. Chem. Theory and Comput.14, 5725 (2018).

95D. G. A. Smith,  L. A. Burns,  A. C. Simmonett,  R. M. Parrish,  M. C. Schieber,  R. Galvelis,

  P. Kraus,  H. Kruse,  R. Di Remigio,  A. Alenaizan,  A. M. James,  S. Lehtola,  J. P. Misiewicz,
  M. Scheurer, R. A. Shaw, J. B. Schriber, Y. Xie, Z. L. Glick, D. A. Sirianni, J. S. O’Brien, J. M.
  Waldrop, A. Kumar, E. G. Hohenstein, B. P. Pritchard, B. R. Brooks, I. Schaefer, Henry F., A. Y.
  Sokolov, K. Patkowski, I. DePrince, A. Eugene, U. Bozkaya, R. A. King, F. A. Evangelista, J. M.
  Turney, T. D. Crawford,  and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Phys.152, 184108 (2020).

96M. C. Bennett, C. A. Melton, A. Annaberdiyev, G. Wang, L. Shulenburger,   and L. Mitas, J.

  Chem. Phys.147, 224106 (2017).

97K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr.44, 1272 (2011).




























                                                         68