      Liquid Latent State Dynamics for Interpretable Turbofan
                                             Degradation Modeling

                                            Weizhi Nie, Weijie Wang, Yuting Su
                                                         Tianjin University

                                                                 Abstract

       Multivariate time-series models for prognostics are often evaluated by point prediction accuracy, yet
       their internal states rarely expose a coherent degradation process.  We study liquid neural networks as
       latent dynamics models for aircraft engine health monitoring on the C-MAPSS benchmark. The proposed
       model encodes a history window into a latent state, evolves that state with a liquid transition model, and
       decodes future sensor observations. To separate health evolution from operating-condition variation, the
       latent state is factorized into degradation and condition components. Remaining useful life, monotonic
       risk, and latent-consistency losses supervise the degradation component, while condition prediction and
       decorrelation losses discourage operating-condition leakage. Across FD001–FD004, the full disentangled
       model improves overall sensor forecasting RMSE from 0.2438 for a GRU baseline to 0.2266, with the
       largest gains on the multi-condition subsets FD002 and FD004. The learned degradation state also forms
       a clearer temporal degradation axis, reaching an average state-speed Spearman correlation of 0.5960.
       Direct remaining-useful-life regression remains stronger for the GRU baseline, indicating that the proposed
       representation is currently more effective as an interpretable world model for degradation dynamics than
       as a calibrated lifetime regressor. These results suggest that liquid latent dynamics can bridge predictive
       maintenance forecasting and inspectable health-state modeling.

1Introduction

Reliable prognostics for complex engineering systems requires more than accurate one-step prediction.  In aircraft
engine monitoring, the measured signal is a multivariate time series of sensor readings and operating settings, while the
quantity of interest is an unobserved health state that evolves over time. A model can therefore obtain low forecasting
error by exploiting short-term sensor regularities without learning a state representation that corresponds to degradation.
This distinction matters in predictive maintenance: practitioners need not only a forecast of future measurements or
remaining useful life (RUL), but also an inspectable trajectory that explains how the system is moving toward failure.
The C-MAPSS turbofan benchmark makes this issue especially clear.  Its subsets contain different combinations of
fault modes and operating conditions, so changes in sensor values may reflect either health deterioration or benign
condition shifts.  Standard recurrent forecasting models can absorb both effects into a single hidden state.  Such a
representation may be sufficient for direct regression, but it is difficult to interpret as an engine health state, and it does
not explicitly define how the state should be rolled forward as a dynamical system. A central challenge is therefore to
learn a latent state that is useful for forecasting while preserving a meaningful separation between degradation dynamics
and operating-condition variation.
We study liquid neural networks as latent dynamics models for this setting.  Given a history window, an encoder
maps the observed sequence to a latent state. A liquid transition model then evolves the state forward, and a decoder
reconstructs future sensor observations. This design treats forecasting as the consequence of latent state evolution rather
than as direct sequence extrapolation. To reduce condition-induced entanglement, the latent state is factorized into a
degradation component and a condition component. RUL, monotonic risk, and latent-consistency losses are applied to
the degradation component, while condition prediction and decorrelation losses encourage the condition component to
capture operating context.
The resulting empirical picture is mixed but informative. On C-MAPSS FD001–FD004, the proposed disentangled
liquid latent model improves overall sensor forecasting RMSE from 0.2438 for a GRU baseline to 0.2266, with the
largest gains on FD002 and FD004, the subsets with more complex operating conditions.  The learned degradation
component also exhibits a clearer temporal degradation axis, with an average state-speed Spearman correlation of


                                                                      1
Figure 1:  Motivation for learning latent degradation dynamics.  Sensor observations mix health degradation with
operating-condition variation; the desired representation is an interpretable hidden-state trajectory whose evolution
exposes the degradation trend behind future observations.


0.5960.  However, the method does not yet outperform the GRU baseline on direct RUL RMSE. This limitation is
important: the current model is best understood as an interpretable latent world model for degradation dynamics, rather
than as a fully calibrated lifetime regressor.
This paper makes the following contributions:

     •  A liquid latent dynamics formulation for multivariate turbofan sensor forecasting, in which future observations
       are generated by rolling forward an explicit latent state.

     •  A disentangled state design that separates degradation and operating condition factors and restricts RUL-oriented
       supervision to the degradation component.

     •  An empirical evaluation on all four C-MAPSS subsets showing improved sensor forecasting under complex
       operating conditions and more coherent degradation-state geometry, together with a transparent analysis of the
       remaining RUL calibration gap.

2Related Work

Remaining useful life estimation.The C-MAPSS turbofan benchmark is a standard testbed for data-driven prognos-
tics because it provides run-to-failure trajectories under different fault and operating-condition settings [Saxena et al.,
2008].  More broadly, prognostics and health management has long studied the estimation of degradation state and
remaining useful life from condition-monitoring signals [Schwabacher, 2005, Jardine et al., 2006, Si et al., 2011, Lei
et al., 2018, Zhao et al., 2019, Gao et al., 2020]. A large body of work frames C-MAPSS primarily as a supervised RUL
regression problem. Early neural approaches already used recurrent models for engine RUL estimation [Heimes, 2008],
while later work adopted LSTMs and sequence embeddings to learn temporal features directly from sensor windows
[Zheng et al., 2017, Gugulothu et al., 2017, Malhotra et al., 2016]. Convolutional and temporal-convolutional variants
improve local temporal feature extraction [Babu et al., 2016, Li et al., 2018, Jayasinghe et al., 2019], and attention-based


                                                                       2
or Transformer-style architectures provide more flexible feature aggregation [Vaswani et al., 2017, Lim et al., 2021,
Zhou et al., 2021]. These models are strong baselines for direct lifetime regression, and our experiments confirm that a
GRU remains competitive for RUL RMSE. The goal of this paper is therefore not to claim a new RUL-only state of the
art. Instead, it asks whether a prognostic model can learn an explicit latent degradation dynamics that remains useful for
forecasting and inspection.


Latent dynamics and world models.Learning a compact state whose evolution explains future observations is a
central idea in latent dynamics models and world models. Variational recurrent and state-space models combine latent
variables with learned transition models for sequential data [Chung et al., 2015, Krishnan et al., 2015, Fraccaro et al.,
2016]. In model-based reinforcement learning, world models learn compressed representations and predict their future
evolution to support planning or policy learning [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018, Hafner et al., 2019]. This perspective is
attractive for prognostics because sensor readings are observations of an underlying physical process rather than the
process itself. However, most industrial RUL models optimize the final prediction target directly, leaving the learned
hidden state underconstrained. Our work adopts the latent dynamics view but applies it to predictive maintenance: the
latent state is rolled forward to forecast future sensors, and its geometry is evaluated as a candidate degradation state.


Continuous-time neural dynamics.Neural ordinary differential equations introduced a general framework for
learning continuous transformations by parameterizing the derivative of a hidden state with a neural network [Chen
et al., 2018]. Subsequent work extended this idea to irregularly sampled time series through ODE-RNNs and Latent
ODEs [Rubanova et al., 2019]. Liquid time-constant networks belong to the same broad family of continuous-time
recurrent models, but use input- and state-dependent time constants to obtain adaptive hidden dynamics [Hasani et al.,
2021]. Related continuous-time recurrent architectures include neural circuit policies and closed-form continuous-depth
models [Lechner et al., 2020, Hasani et al., 2022].  This property is appealing for degradation modeling, where the
rate of change may vary with both health state and operating condition.  Existing liquid-network work has mainly
emphasized expressivity, stability, and sequence prediction. We use liquid dynamics more narrowly: as the transition
operator of a prognostic latent state whose degradation-related structure can be inspected.


Disentanglement under operating conditions.A persistent difficulty in turbofan prognostics is that sensor variation
mixes two factors: degradation and operating condition. Multi-condition C-MAPSS subsets such as FD002 and FD004
are therefore harder than single-condition subsets because a model may mistake benign operating shifts for health
changes, or hide both factors in the same representation. Prior RUL models often address this issue implicitly through
normalization, windowing, attention, or larger sequence encoders. These choices can improve predictive accuracy, but
they do not by themselves specify which part of the representation corresponds to degradation. Representation-learning
work has shown that disentanglement can be encouraged through architectural and objective-level constraints, but also
that unsupervised disentanglement is fragile without suitable inductive bias [Bengio et al., 2013, Higgins et al., 2017,
Locatello et al., 2019]. Our approach therefore makes the intended separation explicit by factorizing the latent state into
degradation and condition components, supervising RUL and monotonic risk only through the degradation component,
and penalizing correlation with operating settings. The resulting separation is imperfect, as condition states still contain
some degradation information, but it provides a concrete mechanism for testing whether a learned prognostic state is
interpretable rather than merely predictive.

3Method

3.1Problem Formulation

Letxt∈R dx denote the observed sensor vector at cyclet, and letat∈R da denote the corresponding operating setting.
In C-MAPSS,da = 3 anddx = 21. We writeut = [a t,xt]∈R  da+d   x for the full observation at one cycle. Given a
history window of lengthL,
                                              Xt = [u t−L+1  ,...,ut],   u t = [a t,xt],                                                      (1)
the model predicts future sensor observations ˆx t+1:t+H           over a horizonH, given future operating settingsat+1:t+H          . It
also estimates a normalized RUL target at the end of the horizon. We usezt∈R dz to denote the learned latent system


                                                                        3
Figure 2:  Framework of the proposed liquid latent dynamics model.  The method encodes a history window into
degradation and condition states,  rolls the degradation state forward with liquid dynamics conditioned on future
operating settings, and decodes the resulting hidden-state trajectory into future sensor predictions. The central object is
the learned evolution trend of the latent degradation state, rather than a direct sequence-to-sequence mapping.


state, and ∆z  t+h    =z t+h −z t+h−1         to denote the learned state increment during one rollout step. The central modeling
assumption is that the sensor readings are observations of an underlying state, rather than the state itself:

                                                                     xt∼p(x   t|z t,at).                                                                         (2)

The objective is therefore to learn a state representation whose rollout explains future observations and whose state
increments reflect degradation progress.


3.2Liquid Latent Dynamics

The basic model consists of three components: an encoder, a liquid transition operator, and a decoder.  A recurrent
encoder maps the history window to an initial latent state,

                                                                         zt =E θ(X t).                                                                             (3)
The latent state is then rolled forward with a setting-conditioned liquid cell,

                                            zt+h ,∆z  t+h    =G ψ(z t+h−1   ,at+h   ),   h= 1,...,H.                                            (4)

In implementation, the liquid cell computes a target drift and an adaptive time constant.  For compactness, define
ct+h    = [z t+h−1   ,at+h   ]as the transition input. The cell computes

                                                          mt+h    =f ψ(c t+h   ),                                                                                      (5)
                                                            τt+h    = softplus(g       ψ(c t+h   )) +ϵ,                                                             (6)
                                                            γt+h    = 1−exp(−∆t/τ         t+h   ),                                                                   (7)
                                                         ∆z  t+h    =γ t+h ⊙(m  t+h −z t+h−1       ),                                                           (8)
                                                            zt+h    =z t+h−1        + ∆z  t+h .                                                                         (9)


                                                                                  4
Herefψ  andgψ  are neural networks,mt+h     is the state-dependent drift target,τt+h     is an adaptive time constant,ϵ
prevents numerical degeneracy,γt+h ∈(0,1)        is the learned update gate, and⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication.
The key quantity is ∆z  t+h    : the model does not predict an unconstrained next state directly. Instead, it learns how far
the current state should move toward a locally predicted drift target, with the step size controlled by the time constant.
A smallτ produces a larger gate and faster movement, whereas a largeτ produces a smaller gate and slower movement.
The liquid transition therefore parameterizes the trend of hidden-state change.
The state increment is learned indirectly through several constraints. Sensor forecasting gradients force the rolled-out
states to reconstructxt+1:t+H          .  Latent consistency pulls the rollout state toward the state obtained by re-encoding
the observed future window. The monotonic risk loss biases the degradation direction so that risk does not decrease
along the rollout. Finally, the smoothness penalty controls the magnitude of ∆z    , preventing the latent trajectory from
becoming an arbitrary jump process. This is a discrete rollout of adaptive continuous-time recurrent dynamics, but we
treat it as a learned transition model rather than an identified physical law. Future sensor values are decoded from the
rolled-out states:
                                                                   ˆx t+h    =D ϕ(z t+h   ).                                                                       (10)
A risk/RUL head also reads from the final latent state,

                                                                RULt+H     =Q η(z t+H    ).                                                                   (11)[


3.3Disentangled Degradation and Condition State

The basic latent state can mix degradation and operating condition. To make the intended structure explicit, the proposed
model factorizes the encoded state as
                                                                    zt = [z degt  ,zcondt     ],                                                                        (12)
wherezdegt     is intended to carry health and degradation information, andzcondt       is intended to carry operating-context
information. The encoder produces the two components through separate heads:

                                                                 zdegt  ,zcondt      =E θ(X t).                                                                    (13)

During rollout, the condition state is updated from the previous condition state and the future operating setting,

                                                             zcondt+h      =C ω(z  condt+h−1   ,at+h   ),                                                                (14)

while the degradation state is evolved by a liquid transition conditioned on both the operating setting and the current
condition state:
                                                 zdegt+h ,∆z     degt+h    =G ψzdegt+h−1   ,[a t+h ,zcondt+h     ].                                                   (15)

In this form, the learned degradation increment ∆z    degt+h     is the main object of interest. It describes how the health-related
state changes from one cycle to the next after accounting for operating condition. The condition state does not directly
determine RUL; instead, it modulates the degradation transition by indicating the operating regime. This design prevents
the model from explaining all sensor variation with a single hidden vector and allows us to test whether the degradation
subspace follows a coherent trajectory. The decoder uses both factors,

                                                               ˆx t+h    =D ϕ(z  degt+h ,zcondt+h     ),                                                                  (16)

but the prognostic head uses only the degradation component:

                                                                RULt+H     =Q η(z  deg[  t+H    ).                                                                   (17)

We define a normalized risk score as
                                                                 rt+h    = 1−Q  η(z  degt+h   ),                                                                    (18)
so that increasing risk corresponds to decreasing predicted remaining life.




                                                                               5
3.4Training Objective

The model is trained with a multi-term objective that combines forecasting accuracy, RUL supervision, latent rollout
consistency, monotonic risk, condition prediction, decorrelation, and a smoothness penalty:

                                       L=L       sensor +λ    rulLRUL +λ    latentLlatent +λ    monoLmono
                                              +λ    condLcond +λ    decorLdecor +λ    smoothLsmooth.                                             (19)

The sensor forecasting loss is
                                                                          HX
                                                      Lsensor =  1H           ∥ˆx  t+h −x t+h ∥22.                                                          (20)
                                                                         h=1
The RUL loss supervises the normalized RUL prediction at the end of the forecasting horizon:
                                                                  [                             2
                                                      LRUL =        RULt+H −RUL t+H
                                                                                                   2.                                                          (21)

Latent consistency compares the rolled-out latent states with states obtained by re-encoding shifted windows that
include the observed future. In the disentangled model, this consistency term is applied to the degradation component:

                                                                          HX  zdeg              2
                                                       Llatent =  1H              t+h −¯z      degt+h
                                                                         h=1                       2,                                                          (22)

where ¯z   degt+h     is produced by encoding the shifted window ending att+h     , and gradients are stopped through this target.
The monotonicity loss discourages decreasing degradation risk during the rollout:

                                                                  HX
                                               Lmono =  1H             max(0,−(r        t+h −r t+h−1       )).                                                  (23)
                                                                 h=1

To make the condition component carry operating context, an auxiliary head predicts the future setting:

                                                                         HX
                                                       Lcond =  1H           ∥ˆa  t+h −a t+h ∥22.                                                           (24)
                                                                        h=1
The decorrelation term penalizes empirical covariance between degradation and condition states, and between degrada-
tion states and operating settings:

                                          Ldecor =Cov(z  deg,zcond)2F +Cov(z  deg,a) 2F.                                            (25)

Finally, the smoothness penalty controls the average magnitude of the liquid state update:

                                                                               HX  ∆z    deg2.                                                              (26)
                                                         Lsmooth =  1H                   t+h
                                                                             h=1

3.5Implementation Details

The encoder is a GRU over the concatenated operating settings and sensor measurements. The liquid transition, decoder,
RUL head, and condition head are implemented as small multilayer perceptrons with smooth nonlinearities.  The
disentangled model splits the latent dimension approximately in half between degradation and condition components.
Training uses teacher-observed future windows only to form latent-consistency targets; the rollout itself predicts future
sensors autoregressively through the learned latent transition.  Gradients through the latent-consistency targets are
stopped, so this term regularizes the rollout toward the encoder geometry without collapsing the encoder to the transition
output.


                                                                             6
Algorithm 1Training Disentangled Liquid Latent Dynamics
Require:  History window Xt  =  [u t−L+1  ,...,ut],  future settings at+1:t+H          ,  future sensors xt+1:t+H          ,  and target
     RULt+H
Ensure:  Trained encoderEθ, liquid transitionGψ, condition updateCω, decoderDϕ, setting headPρ, and RUL head
     Qη
  1:Encode history:(z                   degt  ,zcondt     )←E   θ(X t)
  2:Initialize riskr    t←1−Q    η(z  degt    )
  3:forh= 1,...,Hdo
  4:  z   condt+h  ←C  ω(z  condt+h−1   ,at+h   )
  5:     (z     degt+h ,∆z     degt+h   )←G   ψ(z  degt+h−1   ,[a t+h ,zcondt+h     ])
  6:     ˆx  t+h ←D  ϕ(z  degt+h ,zcondt+h     )
  7:  r t+h ←1−Q    η(z  degt+h   )
  8:     ˆa  t+h ←P  ρ(z  condt+h     )
  9:      Re-encode the shifted observed window ending att+hto obtain stop-gradient target¯z                      degt+h
10:end for
11:Compute the weighted objective in Eq. 19
12:Update all trainable parameters by backpropagation


4Experiments

4.1Dataset

We evaluate on the NASA C-MAPSS turbofan degradation benchmark [Saxena et al., 2008]. The benchmark contains
simulated run-to-failure trajectories of aircraft engines.  Each cycle contains three operating settings and 21 sensor
measurements. The four subsets differ in the number of operating conditions and fault modes: FD001 contains one
operating condition and one fault mode; FD002 contains multiple operating conditions and one fault mode; FD003
contains one operating condition and multiple fault modes; and FD004 contains multiple operating conditions and
multiple fault modes. This structure is important for our study because FD002 and FD004 explicitly test whether the
model can handle operating-condition variation while learning degradation dynamics.
For each engine trajectory, the raw RUL at cyclet is computed as the number of remaining cycles before the final
observed cycle of that engine. We use the common capped RUL target,

                                                        RULcapt    = min(RULt,125)125    ,                                                              (27)

so the supervised RUL target lies in [0,1]    .  Sensor and operating-setting features are standardized using statistics
computed only from the training engines of the corresponding subset.
We construct supervised windows from each trajectory. A history window of lengthL= 30    is used as input, and the
model predicts the nextH= 5    cycles. The input at each history step is the concatenation of operating settings and
sensor values. The future operating settingsat+1:t+H           are provided to the model during rollout, and the prediction target
is the future sensor sequencext+1:t+H           together with the capped RUL at the end of the horizon. For each subset and
random seed, engines are split by unit identity into 70% training, 15% validation, and 15% test units. This unit-level
split prevents windows from the same engine trajectory from appearing in both training and evaluation.


4.2Evaluation Protocol

We evaluate three complementary aspects of the model: sensor forecasting, direct RUL regression, and latent degradation
alignment.  Sensor forecasting is measured by root mean squared error (RMSE) over all predicted sensors and all





                                                                          7
Table 1: Sensor forecasting and RUL regression comparison on C-MAPSS. Lower is better for sensor RMSE and RUL
RMSE; higher is better for Spearman correlations.
                         Subset      GRU sensor     Dis+RUL sensor     GRU RUL     Dis+RUL RUL     Speedρ
                         FD001              0.4401                     0.4415         15.4393                 16.2309       0.5533
                         FD002              0.1058         0.0627         18.6980    19.5579       0.6115
                         FD003  0.3357          0.339814.3790    14.6824       0.5859
                         FD004              0.0936         0.0625         19.7048    21.1477       0.6335


forecasting horizons:                                       vuut
                                                                   1       NX   HX  ˆx  (i)            2
                                        RMSEsensor =            NHdx                    ti+h −x    (i)ti+h
                                                                          i=1  h=1                        2.                                           (28)

We also report first-step and last-step sensor RMSE when analyzing horizon effects. RUL regression is measured by
RMSE after rescaling the normalized prediction back to cycle units:
                                                              vuut
                                                                  1    NX           (i) −RUL    (i)  2
                                           RMSERUL =              N          RUL[                       .                                                (29)
                                                                      i=1

To evaluate whether the learned state reflects degradation progress, we compute rank correlations against a capped
degradation variable,
                                                       dt = 125−min(RUL    t,125).                                                              (30)
First, we measure the Spearman correlation between predicted riskrt = 1−  [PHRULt anddt. Second, for liquid models,
we measure the Spearman correlation between the average rollout speed  1H                         h=1 ∥∆z   t+h ∥2 anddt. The latter metric
is not a conventional RUL accuracy metric; it is intended to test whether the learned latent dynamics changes more
strongly as the engine moves toward failure.
As an auxiliary degradation-detection evaluation, we convert RUL into a binary normal/abnormal label using two
separated regions:  samples with RUL≥125          are treated as normal, and samples with RUL≤30          are treated as
abnormal. Intermediate samples are excluded from this binary evaluation. The detection score is the model riskrt. We
report AUROC, AUPRC, balanced accuracy, and F1. The threshold for balanced accuracy and F1 is selected on the
validation split by maximizing F1 and is then applied once to the held-out test split.
All reported experiments use five random seeds,{7,11,13,17,23}                        , and train for 50 epochs. The validation criterion is
the sum of sensor RMSE and a small weighted RUL RMSE term, RMSEsensor + 0.02 RMSE    RUL, which selects check-
points that preserve forecasting accuracy while discouraging pathological RUL predictions. The primary comparison is
against a GRU baseline with the same history window and future-setting inputs. We also compare basic liquid latent
dynamics, disentangled liquid dynamics, and the full disentangled model with RUL, monotonicity, latent-consistency,
condition, and decorrelation losses.


4.3Comparison with Existing Baselines

Table 1 compares the current GRU baseline and the full disentangled liquid model on sensor forecasting and RUL
regression.  The results reveal a useful but nontrivial trade-off.  The proposed model gives clear sensor-forecasting
gains on the multi-condition subsets FD002 and FD004, where operating-condition variation is most prominent. On
FD002, sensor RMSE decreases from 0.1058 to 0.0627; on FD004, it decreases from 0.0936 to 0.0625.  These are
the settings where disentangling degradation from condition variation should be most beneficial. However, the GRU
remains stronger for direct RUL RMSE on three of the four subsets.  This supports our central interpretation:  the
proposed model is better positioned as a latent degradation dynamics model and sensor world model than as a purely
optimized RUL regressor.




                                                                         8
Figure 3: Sensor forecasting RMSE by subset. The proposed Dis+RUL model provides the clearest improvement on
the multi-condition subsets FD002 and FD004.


Figure 3 visualizes the same forecasting pattern. The gains are small or absent on FD001 and FD003, but become large
on FD002 and FD004.  This is consistent with the motivation of the method: a separate condition-modulated latent
dynamics is most useful when operating regimes vary.
We further compare against a broader set of degradation-detection baselines in Table 2.  This comparison uses the
normal/abnormal protocol described above, with risk as the detection score.  Under this protocol, both the current
GRU and the proposed Dis+RUL model are very strong, and the task is close to saturated.  The proposed model
obtains the best AUPRC, balanced accuracy, and F1 among the compared methods, while the GRU has a marginally
higher risk-degradation rank correlation. Compared with the strongest previous non-current baseline, knn_last_5,
Dis+RUL improves AUPRC from 0.9921 to 0.9984, balanced accuracy from 0.9717 to 0.9953, and F1 from 0.9592 to
0.9923. The practical implication is not that detection alone proves a superior RUL model; rather, it shows that the
learned risk signal is highly separable for early-vs-late degradation while the latent dynamics model simultaneously
improves sensor forecasting.
Figure 4 highlights the near-saturated detection performance of both current models. Dis+RUL is slightly better on
AUPRC, balanced accuracy, and F1, while AUROC is essentially tied.  This supports the view that the learned risk
score is highly effective for separating normal and late-degradation samples, but it also warns against overinterpreting
detection as full RUL calibration.
The detection results should be interpreted with care. The normal/abnormal split removes intermediate degradation
stages, so it is easier than calibrated RUL regression over the full trajectory.  For this reason, we use the detection
comparison as evidence that the learned risk score is discriminative, while the RUL RMSE results remain the stricter
test of lifetime calibration. Under this more conservative reading, the main empirical claim is that Dis+RUL combines
strong degradation detection with better sensor forecasting and an inspectable latent degradation trajectory, but does not
yet dominate direct GRU regression on RUL RMSE.


4.4Ablation Study

Table 3 summarizes the main ablation over model structure and supervision. Moving from the GRU baseline to basic
liquid latent dynamics improves overall sensor RMSE from 0.2438 to 0.2347, suggesting that rolling a latent state


                                                                      9
Table 2: Degradation detection comparison with existing baselines. Higher is better for all metrics. Current models use
rt = 1−  [RULt as the detection score.
                           Method                                         AUROC     AUPRC       BAcc            F1    ρ
                           GRU-current                  0.99970.9978     0.9948     0.99210.8570
                           Dis+RUL-current                            0.99970.9984     0.9953     0.99230.8564
                           knn_last_5        0.9951       0.9921     0.9717     0.9592     0.6831
                           Normal-World Ours                        0.9866       0.9712     0.9594     0.9316     0.7056
                           gdn_lite                  0.9184       0.8969     0.8704     0.8089     0.5159
                           pca_last_8        0.8322       0.7587     0.7623     0.6526     0.3848
                           gru_forecast0.7632       0.6500     0.7463     0.6914     0.3143
                           tcn_forecast0.7582       0.6425     0.7397     0.6799     0.2872
                           gaussian_last0.7527       0.6924     0.7728     0.7159     0.3906
                           transformer_forecast0.7525       0.6496     0.7516     0.7063     0.3150
                           ridge_predictor0.7086       0.5636     0.6781     0.5570     0.2282


Table 3: Overall ablation across all four C-MAPSS subsets. Lower is better for sensor and RUL RMSE; higher is better
for rank correlations. Speedρ measures whether the magnitude of latent-state change aligns with degradation progress.
                                    Model                Sensor RMSE     RUL RMSE      Riskρ   Speedρ
                                    GRU                              0.2438 17.0553     0.8636     –
                                    Liquid                            0.2347            17.2997     0.8586       0.2847
                                    Disentangled                 0.2325            17.4737     0.8531       0.2966
                                    Dis+RUL                0.2266 17.9047     0.85200.5960


forward is useful for multistep sensor forecasting. Adding the degradation/condition factorization further improves
sensor RMSE to 0.2325. The full Dis+RUL model, which adds RUL supervision, monotonic risk, latent consistency,
condition prediction, and decorrelation, gives the best overall sensor RMSE of 0.2266. The most important change is in
the latent-speed alignment: the average speed-vs-degradation Spearman correlation increases from 0.2847 for basic
liquid dynamics and 0.2966 for disentangled liquid dynamics to 0.5960 for Dis+RUL.
This ablation clarifies the role of each design choice. The liquid transition alone improves forecasting because it gives
the model an explicit rollout mechanism, but its latent increments are not yet strongly ordered by degradation. The
disentangled state improves forecasting slightly by separating condition-dependent variation from the state used for
degradation prediction, but this structural split alone is also insufficient to make the trajectory monotonic or health-
aligned. The large increase in speedρ appears only after adding degradation-specific supervision and latent consistency.
This means that the state-change signal ∆z    deg is learned through the combination of rollout prediction, re-encoding
consistency, and monotonic risk, rather than emerging automatically from the liquid architecture alone.
The subset-level ablation in Table 4 shows that the forecasting benefit is concentrated on the multi-condition subsets.
On FD002, Dis+RUL reduces sensor RMSE by 40.7% relative to GRU, and on FD004 it reduces sensor RMSE by
33.2%. These are precisely the subsets where operating conditions can obscure degradation. On FD001 and FD003,
where the operating condition structure is simpler, the liquid models do not improve forecasting over the GRU baseline.
This pattern gives a scoped interpretation of the method: it is not uniformly better on every subset, but is most useful in
the setting it targets, namely degradation modeling under condition variation.
The same pattern appears in the state-evolution metric.  In FD002 and FD004, basic liquid dynamics has near-zero
speed correlation, indicating that the latent state may move, but its movement is not aligned with health progression.
After adding the full degradation-specific objective, speedρ reaches 0.6115 on FD002 and 0.6335 on FD004. Thus, the
ablation supports a two-part claim: liquid rollout helps prediction, while the RUL, monotonic, and latent-consistency
losses make the rollout direction meaningful as a degradation-state transition.
Figure 5 makes the ablation effect on state evolution more explicit. On FD002 and FD004, the basic liquid model has
almost no positive speed-degradation alignment, which means that merely rolling a latent state forward is not enough.
The full Dis+RUL objective changes this behavior: the learned update magnitude becomes strongly associated with
degradation progress.  This is one of the clearest quantitative signs that the model learns a meaningful state-change


                                                                         10
Figure 4: Normal/abnormal degradation detection metrics for current models. Detection is close to saturated under the
selected split; Dis+RUL gives small but consistent gains in AUPRC, balanced accuracy, and F1.


Table 4: Sensor forecasting ablation by subset. Lower is better. The largest gains appear on FD002 and FD004, the
multi-condition subsets.
                                         Subset         GRU      Liquid     Disentangled     Dis+RUL
                                         FD0010.44010.4402               0.4402          0.4415
                                         FD002      0.1058     0.0822               0.07990.0627
                                         FD0030.33570.3419               0.3390          0.3398
                                         FD004      0.0936     0.0743               0.07110.0625
                                         Overall     0.2438     0.2347               0.23250.2266


trend.


4.5Analysis of Learned State Evolution

The ablation results indicate that the full objective does more than improve sensor forecasting. It changes the geometry
and dynamics of the learned latent state. In the basic liquid and disentangled variants, the latent update speed is only
weakly aligned with degradation progress, especially on FD002 and FD004. For example, the speed correlation on
FD004 is 0.0111 for the basic liquid model and 0.0720 for the disentangled model, but rises to 0.6335 after adding
RUL, monotonicity, and degradation-state latent consistency. Similarly, on FD002 the speed correlation changes from
approximately zero to 0.6115. This suggests that the added supervision does not merely alter the final RUL head; it
makes the latent transition itself move in a way that is ordered by degradation.
Training dynamics on FD004 provide another view of this process (Fig. 6). Sensor RMSE decreases rapidly during
early epochs, while detection F1 also becomes high after the risk head learns a separable normal/abnormal score. The
speed-alignment curve is more informative for our main claim: it rises from near zero to a high positive correlation,
showing that the latent transition gradually becomes organized with respect to degradation. Thus, the model first learns
to forecast and separate risk, and then stabilizes a latent trajectory whose increments carry degradation information.
Figure 7 provides a qualitative view of this effect on FD004 with seed 23.  The GRU baseline latent PCA does not
expose a clean degradation coordinate: early, middle, and late states are mixed in a representation trained primarily
for direct prediction. The full liquid latent state is more ordered, but it still contains both degradation and condition


                                                                        11
Figure 5: Latent state-change alignment by subset. Speedρ measures the Spearman correlation between degradation
and the average magnitude of ∆z    . The full Dis+RUL objective strongly increases this alignment on FD002 and FD004.


information. When the state is decomposed,zdeg forms the clearest degradation trajectory: early states occupy a broad
region on one side of the projection, while high-degradation states concentrate along a terminal band.  In contrast,
zcond is more diffuse and does not form the same clean terminal degradation structure. This difference supports the
intended factorization, but also reveals its limitation:zcond is not completely free of degradation information, so the
disentanglement should be viewed as useful but imperfect.
Panel (c) in Fig. 7 provides the most direct visual evidence. It visualizes onlyzdeg, the subspace that receives RUL,
monotonicity, and latent-consistency supervision. If the model were merely usingzdeg as another unconstrained feature
vector, the projection would look similar to the GRU hidden state or to the diffuse condition state. Instead, the samples
organize along a visible degradation direction: low degradation states are spread over the early region, intermediate
states move through the middle of the projection, and high degradation states concentrate near a terminal band. This
geometry matches the intended behavior of the degradation state. It suggests thatzdeg is not only predictive, but also
behaves like a state coordinate whose position changes as the engine moves toward failure.
This  visual  trend  is  consistent  with  the  learned  liquid  increment.   During  rollout,  the  model  repeatedly  applies
zdegt+h    =z    degt+h−1        + ∆z    degt+h    . The ordered structure in Fig. 7(c) therefore indicates that the accumulated increments move
the latent state along a degradation-oriented path rather than scattering it arbitrarily. The high speed-vs-degradation
correlations provide the quantitative counterpart:  as degradation increases, the magnitude of the learned transition
∥∆z      deg∥ becomes more aligned with the degradation level. Together, panel (c) and the speed correlations form the
main evidence that the model learns a trend-changing hidden state.
Together, the quantitative speed correlations and the PCA visualizations support the claim that the model learns a
degradation-related state evolution rather than only a static predictive embedding. The evidence is strongest on FD002
and FD004, where operating-condition variation makes a single hidden state harder to interpret.  At the same time,
the weaker RUL RMSE and residual degradation leakage intozcond show that the learned state is not yet a perfectly
calibrated health coordinate. This is the main remaining gap between an interpretable latent dynamics model and a fully
accurate prognostic estimator.






                                                                       12
Figure 6: Training dynamics for FD004 seed 23. Forecasting error decreases, detection F1 becomes high, and speed-
degradation alignment rises from near zero to a strong positive value, indicating that the learned state increments
become ordered by degradation during training.

5Future Work

This work suggests several directions for improvement. First, the current model learns a degradation-oriented latent
trajectory, but its RUL calibration is still weaker than the GRU baseline. Future work should separate representation
learning from calibration more explicitly, for example by adding calibration losses, uncertainty estimates, or post-hoc
monotone calibration on top of the learned degradation coordinate.  Second, the disentanglement betweenzdeg and
zcond is useful but imperfect. Stronger decorrelation, adversarial condition removal, or condition-invariant contrastive
objectives may reduce degradation leakage into the condition state.  Third, the current evaluation uses C-MAPSS,
where degradation trajectories are simulated and relatively clean. Real industrial systems may contain maintenance
events, sensor drift, missing observations, and non-monotone operating regimes, all of which require more robust latent
dynamics.
A broader direction is to extend liquid latent state dynamics from machinery degradation to biological and medical
progression.  Many diseases can also be viewed as partially observed dynamical processes:  clinical measurements,
laboratory tests, imaging biomarkers, or wearable signals are observations of an underlying health state that changes
over time. Related work on time-domain event recognition, clinical temporal modeling, medical prior knowledge, and
causal diagnosis suggests that progression modeling benefits from explicitly representing temporal change and domain
constraints [Su et al., 2019, Nie et al., 2018, 2023, Li et al., 2023, Nie et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2025]. A
model that learns ∆z    , rather than only a static risk score, could potentially describe how a patient’s latent disease state
evolves and how interventions or conditions modulate that evolution. This extension should be treated carefully. Unlike
C-MAPSS, disease progression involves heterogeneous populations, irregular sampling, treatment effects, confounding,
and high-stakes clinical decisions.  Applying this framework to medicine will require uncertainty-aware prediction,
causal validation, clinically meaningful state definitions, and prospective evaluation. Nevertheless, the present results
motivate studying liquid latent dynamics as a tool for interpretable progression modeling in domains where the main
object of interest is an unobserved state trajectory.

6Conclusion

This paper presented a disentangled liquid latent dynamics model for interpretable turbofan degradation modeling. The
method encodes a history of sensor readings and operating settings into a latent state, learns liquid state increments ∆z
to roll that state forward, and decodes the resulting trajectory into future sensor predictions. By separating degradation
and condition components and applying RUL, monotonicity, and latent-consistency losses to the degradation state, the
model encouragesz                     deg to behave as an inspectable health-state coordinate.
Experiments on C-MAPSS show that the full model improves sensor forecasting overall, with the largest gains on
the multi-condition FD002 and FD004 subsets.  The ablation study and PCA visualizations further show that the


                                                                       13
                       (a) GRU hidden state                                                     (b) Full liquid latent state





















                    (c) Degradation statez          deg                                          (d) Condition statez          cond
Figure 7: PCA visualization of learned states on FD004 with seed 23, colored by capped degradation. Compared with
the GRU hidden state, the proposed model learns a more ordered latent evolution. The degradation componentzdeg
shows the clearest progression from early states to terminal degraded states, whilez           cond remains more diffuse.


learned degradation state exhibits an ordered trajectory, and that the magnitude of latent state change aligns with
degradation progress. At the same time, direct RUL RMSE remains stronger for the GRU baseline, and the condition
state still contains some degradation leakage. The resulting conclusion is deliberately bounded: liquid latent dynamics
is promising for learning interpretable degradation-state evolution and sensor world models, but further work is needed
to turn this representation into a fully calibrated lifetime predictor.

References

Giduthuri Sateesh Babu, Peilin Zhao, and Xiao-Li Li. Deep convolutional neural network based regression approach
   for estimation of remaining useful life.  InProceedings of the International Conference on Database Systems for
  Advanced Applications, pages 214–228, 2016.

Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new perspectives.IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828, 2013.



                                                                        14
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Junyoung Chung, Kyle Kastner, Laurent Dinh, Kratarth Goel, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. A recurrent latent
  variable model for sequential data. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.

Marco Fraccaro, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Ulrich Paquet, and Ole Winther.  Sequential neural models with stochastic
  layers. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.

Yifan Gao, Yuxuan Zhu, Xin Li, and Yaguo Wang. A survey of deep learning for remaining useful life prediction.arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.06414, 2020.

Narendhar  Gugulothu,  Vishnu  TV,  Pankaj  Malhotra,  Lovekesh  Vig,  Puneet  Agarwal,  and  Gautam  Shroff.   Pre-
  dicting remaining useful life using time series embeddings based on recurrent neural networks.arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1709.01073, 2017.

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber.   Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution.   InAdvances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James Davidson. Learning
  latent dynamics for planning from pixels.  InProceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.

Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Liquid time-constant networks. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.

Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Closed-form continuous-time neural
  networks.Nature Machine Intelligence, 4:992–1003, 2022.

Felix O. Heimes. Recurrent neural networks for remaining useful life estimation. InProceedings of the International
  Conference on Prognostics and Health Management, 2008.

Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed,
  and Alexander Lerchner.  beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework.  In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Andrew K. S. Jardine,  Daming Lin,  and Dragan Banjevic.   A review on machinery diagnostics and prognostics
  implementing condition-based maintenance.Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 20(7):1483–1510, 2006.

Lahiru Jayasinghe, Tharaka Samarasinghe, Chau Yuen, Jenny Chen Ni Low, and Shuzhi Sam Ge. Temporal convolu-
  tional memory networks for remaining useful life estimation of industrial machinery.arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05644,
  2019.

Rahul G. Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Deep kalman filters.arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05121, 2015.

Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Thomas A. Henzinger, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu.  Neural
  circuit policies enabling auditable autonomy.Nature Machine Intelligence, 2:642–652, 2020.

Yaguo Lei, Naipeng Li, Liang Guo, Ningbo Li, Tao Yan, and Jing Lin. Machinery health prognostics: A systematic
  review from data acquisition to rul prediction.Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 104:799–834, 2018.

Qiang Li, Hengxin Liu, Weizhi Nie, and Ting Wu.  Brain tumor image segmentation based on prior knowledge via
  transformer.International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology, 2023.

Qiang Li, Dongchen Li, He Jiao, Zhenhua Wu, and Weizhi Nie. Cisepsis: A causal inference framework for early sepsis
  detection.Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, 2024.

Xiang Li, Qian Ding, and Jian-Qiao Sun. Remaining useful life estimation in prognostics using deep convolution neural
  networks.Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 172:1–11, 2018.



                                                                    15
Bryan Lim, Sercan O. Arik, Nicolas Loeff, and Tomas Pfister. Temporal fusion transformers for interpretable multi-
  horizon time series forecasting.International Journal of Forecasting, 37(4):1748–1764, 2021.

Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schoelkopf, and Olivier
  Bachem.   Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations.   In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Pankaj Malhotra, Anusha Ramakrishnan, Gaurangi Anand, Lovekesh Vig, Puneet Agarwal, and Gautam Shroff. Lstm-
  based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detection.  InProceedings of the ICML Workshop on Anomaly
  Detection, 2016.

Weizhi Nie, Yan Yan, Tong Hao, Chenchen Liu, and Yuting Su.  Mitosis event recognition and detection based on
  evolution of feature in time domain.Machine Vision and Applications, 29(8):1249–1256, 2018.

Weizhi Nie, Yuhe Yu, Chen Zhang, Dan Song, Lina Zhao, and Yunpeng Bai.  Temporal-spatial correlation attention
  network for clinical data analysis in intensive care unit.IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2023.

Weizhi Nie, Ruidong Chen, Weijie Wang, Bruno Lepri, and Nicu Sebe. T2td: Text-3d generation model based on prior
  knowledge guidance.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pages 1–18, 2024.

Yulia Rubanova, Ricky T. Q. Chen, and David Duvenaud. Latent ordinary differential equations for irregularly-sampled
  time series. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

Abhinav Saxena,  Kai Goebel,  Don Simon,  and Neil Eklund.   Damage propagation modeling for aircraft engine
  run-to-failure simulation. InProceedings of the International Conference on Prognostics and Health Management,
  2008.

Mark Schwabacher. A survey of data-driven prognostics.AIAA Infotech@Aerospace Conference, 2005.

Xiao-Sheng Si, Wenbin Wang, Chang-Hua Hu, and Dong-Hua Zhou. Remaining useful life estimation: A review on the
  statistical data driven approaches.European Journal of Operational Research, 213(1):1–14, 2011.

Yuting Su, Shan Wang, Weizhi Nie, and Yang An.  Pooled time series representation for mitosis event recognition.
  Multimedia Systems, 2019.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
  Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Qiyi Zhang, Wei Zhang, Qiang Li, Yunpeng Bai, Weizhi Nie, and Keliang Xie. Causal inference model for accurate
  medical diagnosis in coronary artery bypass graft operation.Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 2025.

Rui Zhao, Ruqiang Yan, Zhenghua Chen, Kezhi Mao, Peng Wang, and Robert X. Gao. Deep learning and its applications
  to machine health monitoring. InMechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 2019.

Shuai Zheng, Kosta Ristovski, Ahmed Farahat, and Chetan Gupta. Long short-term memory network for remaining
  useful life estimation. InProceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Prognostics and Health Management,
  2017.

Haoyi Zhou, Shanghang Zhang, Jieqi Peng, Shuai Zhang, Jianxin Li, Hui Xiong, and Wancai Zhang. Informer: Beyond
  efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.












                                                                    16